Annual Cloud Seeding Report 
Western Uintas Program 
2022-2023 Winter Season 
 
Prepared For: 
Weber Basin Water Conservancy District 
Central Utah Water Conservancy District 
Provo River Water Users Association 
State of Utah, Division of Water Resources 
 
Prepared By: 
Cole Osborne 
North American Weather Consultants, Inc. 
8180 S. Highland Dr., Suite B-2 
Sandy, Utah 84093 
 
June 2023  

1 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................2 
WEATHER MODIFICATION OVERVIEW ................................ ................................ ................................ 3 
STATE OF THE CLIMATE ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................4 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 6 
2. PROGRAM DESIGN ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 7 
2.1 BACKGROUND ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................7 
2.2 SEEDING CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ ................7 
2.3 EQUIPMENT AND PROJECT SET UP ................................ ................................ ........................... 7 
2.4 SUSPENSION CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 10 
3. WEATHER DATA AND MODELS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 11 
4. OPERATIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  15 
4.1 OPERATIONAL SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 20 
5. ASSESSMENT OF SEEDING EFFECTS ................................ ................................ ..............................  33 
5.1 BACKGROUND ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 33 
5.2 CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF TARGET/CONTROL EVALUATIONS ................................ .. 34 
5.3 EVALUATION OF SNOW WATER CONTENT ................................ ................................ ................ 35 
6. CONCLUSIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  44 
REFERENCES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 45 
APPENDIX A SUSPENSION CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 46 
APPENDIX B SEEDING OPERATIONS TABLES ................................ ................................ ...................... 49 
APPENDIX C EVALUATION DATA ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 51 
APPENDIX D GLOSSARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 57 
  
2 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
A total of 26 winter seasons of cloud seeding have been conducted in portions of the Western Uinta Range 
in Utah.  The Western Uintas program utilizes 11 ground -based, manually operated  (Cloud Nuclei 
Generator, or CNG) sites, containing a 2% silver iodide solution. The  goal of the seeding program is to 
augment wintertime snowpack/precipitation over the seeded watersheds. The areas targeted for seeding 
have included the upper portions of both the Weber River and the Provo River drainages in most years.   
Precipitation and snowfall were well above normal during the 2022-2023 winter season, with snow water 
equivalent for the Weber-Ogden River Basin averaging about 198% of the median value on April 1st.  The 
water year precipitation through April 1 st averaged 159% of the nor mal median value across the basin.  
The Provo River basin had corresponding April 1 st averages of 207% of median snowpack and 170% of 
median precipitation.   
A total of 1332 CNG hours were conducted during 22 storm periods this season, out of a maximum 
budgeted 1,500 hours. By late March, it became apparent that flooding risks outweighed further benefits 
of the seeding program this season. Although  higher elevation SNOTEL sites that have been established 
by the Division of Water Resources for program suspension criteria in this area were still below their pre-
defined suspension thresholds, it was observed that the lower elevation snowpack in each drainage basin 
were reaching unprecedented highs. Given this, and the continued unseasonably cold weather into th e 
spring season, the seeding program was suspended and ended for the season a week early on March 24.  
Evaluations of the effectiveness of the cloud seeding program were made for both the 2022-2023 winter 
season as well as the past 2 seeded winter seasons combined.  These evaluations utilize SNOTEL records 
collected by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) at selected sites within and surrounding 
the seeded target area.  Analyses of the effects of seeding on target area precipitation and snow water 
content have been conducted for this seeding program, utilizing target/control comparison techniques.    
Target and Control studies have been conducted after each season of operations. These studies use linear 
and multiple linear regressions to compare seasonal performance in seeded areas vs non -seeded areas. 
The results of these evaluations, for the past 24 years, point to an average increase of 3% to 6% in April 
1st snowpack (as measured by liquid water equivalence) resulting from cloud seeding. This equates to 
an average increase in runoff of roughly 25,000 acre-feet in the target areas. It should be noted that, 
when snowfall for a given season is far lower than average due to abnormal meteorological activity (as 
experienced during the 2022-2023 season), the percentage increase in snow water equivalence resulting 
from cloud seeding generally remains the same. However, the total amount of additional runoff resulting 
from cloud seeding efforts (as measured in acre -feet of runoff) may be lower. Section 5.0 of the report 
contains further discussion of these mathematical analyses and  estimates of the likely value and 
cost/benefit ratio of the seeding program.   
  
3 
 
WEATHER MODIFICATION OVERVIEW 
The Science 
The cloud -seeding process aids precipitation formation by 
enhancing ice crystal production in clouds. When the ice crystals 
grow sufficiently, they become snowflakes and fall to the 
ground.  
Silver iodide has been selected for its environmental safety and 
superior efficiency in producing ice in clouds. Silver iodide adds 
microscopic particles with a structural similarity to natural ice 
crystals. Ground-based and aircraft -borne technologies can be 
used to add the particles to the clouds. 
Safety 
Research has clearly documented that cloud seeding with silver-
iodide aerosols shows no environmentally harmful effect. Iodine 
is a component of many necessary amino acids. Silver is both 
quite inert and naturally occurring, the amounts released are far 
less than background silver already present in unseeded areas. 
Effectiveness 
Numerous studies performed by universities, professional 
research organizations, private utility companies and weather 
modification providers have conclusively demonstrated the 
ability for Silv er Iodide to augment precipitation under the 
proper atmospheric conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4 
 
STATE OF THE CLIMATE 
As reported last year, every ten years, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA) releases 
a summary of various U.S. weather conditions for the past three decades to determines average values 
for a variety of conditions, including, temperature and precipitation.  This is known as the U.S Climate 
normal, with a 30 -year average, representing the “new normal” for our climate.  These 30 -year normal 
values can help to determine a departure from historic norms and identify current weather trends.   
The recently released 30-year average ranges from 1990 – 2020.  Images in Figure 1 and 2 show how each 
30-year average for the past 120 years compares to the composite 20th century average for temperature 
and precipitation.  For the western U.S., the 1990 -2020 average show much warmer than average 
temperatures.  When comparing precipitation for the past 30 years to both the previous 30-year average 
and the 1901-2000 average, the American Southwest (including portions of Utah, Arizona, California and 
Nevada) has seen as much as a 10% decrease in average annual precipitation.  
 
Figure 1 U.S. Annual Temperature compared to 20th-Century Average 

5 
 
 
Figure 2 U.S. annual precipitation compared to 20th-Century average. 
 
  

6 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Due to high natural precipitation variability and the increasing demand for water, cloud seeding has been 
conducted in some parts of Utah for over 40 years, helping to augment water supplies.  Cloud seeding in 
Utah is regulated by the Utah Department of Natural Resources through the Division of Water Resources.   
After complying with various permit requirements, NAWC was granted a license and permit to conduct 
cloud seeding for the Western Uintas program watersheds. A cloud seeding program was conducted again 
during the 2021-2022 winter season for the Upper Weber and Provo River Basins.  Cloud seeding programs 
have been conducted in this area by North American Weather Consul tants dating back to 1989. These 
programs have often been jointly sponsored by two agencies: the Provo River Water Users Association 
and the Weber Basin Water Conservancy District. 
The Weber Basin Water Conservancy District’s participation has been continu ous since the project’s 
inception while the Provo River Water Users Association opted out during water years 2006 to 2012.  The 
Provo River Water Users Association rejoined the program for the 2012 -13 season through the present. 
Eleven ground -based silver iodide cloud nuclei generators (CNGs) were installed for the 202 2-2023 
season’s program.  The main program became operational on December 1, 2022 and ended a week early 
on March 24, 2023. The program was originally contracted to end on March 30, 2023. Howe ver, due to 
the lower elevation snowpack in each drainage basin of the program reaching unprecedented highs, the 
seeding program was suspended and ended for the season a week early on March 24.  
This report provides information about the operational cloud seeding and results of statistical analyses 
toward estimations of cloud seeding effects. Section 2 describes the seeding project design and provides 
maps of the seeded target areas, as well as th e locations of the CNGs with which the seeding was 
conducted.  Section 3 discusses the types of real-time and forecast meteorological data that are used for 
conduct of the seeding programs. Section 4 summarizes the seeding operations conducted during this 
past season.  Section 5 details statistical evaluations of the effects of the cloud seeding program.   
  
7 
 
2. PROGRAM DESIGN 
2.1 Background 
The operational procedures utilized for this cloud seeding project are essentially the same as those that 
have been proven to  be effective for over 40 years of wintertime cloud seeding in the mountainous 
regions of Utah (Griffith et al., 2009).  The results from these operational seeding efforts have consistently 
indicated long-term average increases in wintertime precipitation and snow water content during the 
periods in which cloud seeding was conducted.  These estimated increases have generally ranged from 5 
to 10 percent more than what would have been expected in the absence of seeding, as predicted by 
historical linear regression target/control analyses. 
2.2 Seeding Criteria 
Project operations have utilized a selective seeding approach, which has proven to be the most efficient 
and cost-effective method, and has provided the most beneficial results.  Selective seeding, or seeding  
only of storms or portions of storms in which precipitation has a reasonable chance of being enhanced, is 
based on several criteria which determine the seedability of the winter storms. These criteria deal with 
key characteristics of the air mass (tempera ture, thermodynamic stability, wind flow and moisture 
content), both in and below the precipitating clouds. The following list includes some of the key 
meteorological conditions that generally qualify an event for cloud seeding. 
• Cloud bases are below the mountain barrier crest. 
• Low-level wind directions and speeds would favor the movement of the silver iodide 
particles from their release points into the intended target area. 
• No low-level atmospheric inversions or stable layers that would restrict the upward vertical 
transport of the silver iodide particles from the surface to at least the -5°C (23°F) level or 
colder. 
• Temperature at mountain barrier crest height expected to be -5°C (23°F) or colder. 
• Temperature at the 700mb level (approximately 10,000 feet) expected to be warmer than -
15°C (5°F). 
2.3 Equipment and Project Set Up 
In the fall of 202 2 NAWC reinstalled ground -based cloud seeding generators for the winter seeding 
program.  The generators were placed at carefully selected sites, to provide seedin g plumes that would 
be effective in enhancing snowfall over the project target area.  Climatological winter storm behavior and 
prevailing wind direction are major factors in the placement of these sites.  Eleven seeding sites were 
installed for this year’s seeding program, whose locations are shown in Figure 2.1.  Occasionally, seeding 
sites installed for other seeding programs in the region (such as Northern Utah and High Uintas programs) 
are used to target the Western Uintas program during less commonly occurring wind flow situations.  
  
8 
 
 
Figure 2.1  Western Uintas target area (purple) and ground -based cloud seeding generator locations (blue 
pins). 
Ground-Based Manual Generators 
The cloud seeding equipment consists of a cloud nuclei generator (CNG) unit and a propane gas supply 
(Figure 2.2).  The seeding solution, emitted via combustion, consists of two percent by weight silver iodide 
(AgI), complexed with small portions of sodium iodide and para-dichlorobenzene in solution with acetone. 
The seeding unit is manually operated by igniting the propane flame (at the flame head in a burn chamber) 
and adjusting the flow of seeding solution through a flow rate meter.  The propane gas also pressurizes 
the solution tank, which allows the solution to be sprayed  into the CNG’s burn chamber at a regulated 
rate, where microscopic (sub-micron)-sized silver iodide crystals are formed.  The crystals, which closely 
resemble natural ice crystals in structure, are released at a rate of 8 grams per hour per generator when  
using the 2% solution.  These crystals become active as artificial ice nuclei in -cloud at temperatures 
between -5°C (23°F) and -10°C (14°F).    
It is necessary that the AgI crystals become active in the formation zone (the region in the cloud which 
contains supercooled liquid water) upwind of, or over the project area mountain crest.  This allows the 
available supercooled liquid water to be effectively converted to ice crystals which grow to snowflake size 
and precipitate onto the mountain barrier within the intended area of effect.  If the AgI crystals take too 
long to become active, or if the temperature upwind of the crest is too warm, the seeding plume will pass 
from the generator through the precipitation formation zone and over the mountain crest with out 
producing any additional snowfall at the surface.  It is the meteorologist’s task to identify storm situations 
in which the seeding treatment can be effective. 

9 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2    Manually operated cloud seeding generator 
Cloud seeding generators were sit ed at 11 locations (mostly in the valleys), ranging from the southwest 
to northwest sides of the target area, as shown in Figure 2.1. Pertinent CNG site information is provided 
in Table 2 -1.  Most of the winter storms that affect the northern Utah Mountain s are associated with 
synoptic weather systems that move into Utah from the northwest, west or southwest.  Usually, they 
consist of a frontal system and/or an upper trough with the winds preceding the front or trough blowing 
from the south or southwest.  As each system passes through the area, the wind flow changes to the west, 
northwest, or north.   Clouds and precipitation may precede as well as follow the front/trough passage, 
or they may occur primarily after the passage along the boundary of the colder air mass that moves into 
the region.  For the region comprising the project target area, the most abundant precipitation and low -
mid level moisture usually occurs in west to northwest flow patterns.  This is when the best seeding 
opportunities typically o ccur. Southwesterly flow is generally associated with somewhat warmer 
conditions that are sometimes less seedable. 

10 
 
Table 2-1 
Cloud Seeding Generator Sites 
Site ID Site Name Elev (Ft) Lat (N) Long (W) 
WU-2 Croyden 5371 41° 04.12' 111° 30.83' 
WU-3 Coalville 5587 40° 55.95' 111° 20.72' 
WU-4 Pineview 6407 40° 56.39' 111° 10.18' 
WU-5 Peoa 6148 40° 43.75' 111° 20.61' 
WU-6 Oakley 6472 40° 43.07' 111° 18.00' 
WU-7 Kamas West 6872 40° 38.16' 111° 19.33' 
WU-8 Kamas 6489 40° 38.43' 111° 16.77' 
WU-9 Woodland 6706 40° 34.89' 111° 13.81' 
WU-10 Woodland East 7305 40° 33.35' 111° 06.80' 
WU-11 Midway 5570 40° 30.59' 111° 28.64' 
WU-12 Heber City 5810 40° 29.73' 111° 22.52' 
2.4 Suspension Criteria 
NAWC always conducts its projects within guidelines adopted to ensure public safety. Accordingly, NAWC 
has a standing policy and project -specific procedures for the suspension of cloud seeding operations in 
certain situations. Those criteria are shown in Appendix A and have recently been updated in coordination 
with the Utah Division of Water Resources. The criteria are an integral part of the seeding program. By 
late March, it became apparent that flooding risks outweighed further benefits of the seeding program 
this season. Although higher elevation SNOTEL sites that have been established by the Division of Water 
Resources for program suspension criteria in this area were still below their pre -defined suspension 
thresholds, it was observed that the lower e levation snowpack in each drainage basin were reaching 
unprecedented highs. Given this, and the continued unseasonably cold weather into the spring season, 
the seeding program was suspended and ended for the season a week early on March 24, 2023. 
  
11 
 
3. WEATHER DATA AND MODELS  
NAWC maintains a fully equipped project operations center at its Sandy, Utah headquarters.  
Meteorological information is acquired online from a wide variety of freely available sources and 
subscriber services.  This information in cludes weather forecast model data, surface observations, 
rawinsonde (weather balloon) upper -air observations, satellite images, NEXRAD radar information, and 
weather cameras.  This information helps NAWC’s meteorologists to determine when conditions are 
appropriate for cloud seeding.  NAWC’s meteorologists are able to access all meteorological products 
from their homes, allowing continued monitoring and conduct of seeding operations outside of regular 
business hours. 
Figures 3.1 – 3.3 show examples of some  of the available weather information that was used in this 
decision-making process.  Figure 3.4 displays predictions of ground-based seeding plume dispersion for a 
discrete storm period in the Western Uintas Program from the 202 2-2023 season using the Nat ional 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s HYSPLIT model. This model helps to estimate the horizontal 
and vertical spread of a plume from potential ground-based seeding sites based on wind fields contained 
in the weather forecast models. 
Global and reg ional forecast models are a cornerstone of modern weather forecasting, and important 
tools for operational meteorologists.  These models forecast a variety of parameters at different levels of 
the atmosphere, including winds, temperatures, moisture, and surface parameters such as accumulated 
precipitation.  An example of a display from the global GFS forecast model for a storm event during the 
2022-2023 season is shown in Figure 3.5. 
During the summer of 2022, NAWC built an in-house Python script that has the ability to ingest 3-km High-
Resolution Rapid Refresh (HRRR) model data readily available online. This script allows the user to define 
a grid where seeding operations and liquid water could be occurring. The user can specify a cross section 
over any loc ation in the continental U.S. or Canada. This model data was used during cloud seeding 
operations as guidance. In these cross sections, liquid water is plotted as a function of distance and height, 
with temperatures (red dashed lines), wind directions and speed (wind barbs) and potential temperatures 
(solid black lines) also being displayed. This model was utilized in a variety of different areas where NAWC 
conducts cloud seeding operations. The script has the ability to be run for one specific forecast hou r. 
Figure 3.6 shows an example of the cross-section plot during a seeded event from this past winter season 
that includes liquid water occurrence, temperature, wind direction, wind speed and potential 
temperatures as a function of height. The map inset located in the upper left corner of the cross-section 
plot shows a map of where the cross section was taken within the state of Colorado. It is important to 
notice how much of the predicted liquid water is tied to underlaying terrain due to orographic forcing  
(lifting of the airmass as winds force it over the underlaying terrain). Also notice that much of the predicted 
liquid water is at temperatures of -5° C or colder which is an important feature since the silver iodide 
nuclei released from the remote generators mush reach this level in order for the nuclei to become active 
12 
 
freezing nuclei. This model will continue to be utilized in future winter seasons and possibly lead to further 
verification techniques.   
 
 
Figure 3.1 Day Cloud Phase satellite image of  Utah during the afternoon  of December 12, 2022  during a 
seeded event. 
 
Figure 3.2 Weather radar image over northern Utah during the afternoon  of December 12, 2022.  Image 
courtesy of weatherTAP.com. 

13 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3 U.S. 700 mb map during the afternoon December 12, 2022, illustrating the larger scale weather 
pattern across the region.   
 
Figure 3.4 HYSPLIT plume dispersion forecast from individual ground generator sites during a storm period 
during the afternoon on December 12, 2022 from all potential sites.   

14 
 
 
Figures 3.5 GFS (Global Forecast Systems) 4-Panel model plot during the storm event on the afternoon of 
December 11-13, 2023.   
 
Figure 3.6 HRRR modeled Cross Section of Liquid Water on February 27, 2023 – Valid at 2100 MST  
 
  

15 
 
4. OPERATIONS 
The 2022-2023 Western Uintas cloud seeding program for the Weber and Provo River basins began on 
December 1, 2022, and ended on March 24, 2023.  The program was originally contracted to end on March 
30, 2023. However, due to the lower elevation snowpack in each drainage basin of the program reaching 
unprecedented highs, the seeding program was suspended and ended for the season a week early on 
March 24. A total of 22 storm periods were seeded during all or portions of 31 days: five storms were 
seeded in December, five in January, five in February, and seven in March.  A total of 1330 seeding 
generator hours were conducted this season. Table 4-1 shows the dates and ground generator usage for 
the storm events, and Appendix B contains more detailed site usage data. Figure 4.1 shows the usage of 
generator hours during the season. 
Precipitation and snowfall were well above normal during the 2022-2023 winter season, with snow water 
equivalent for the Weber-Ogden River basin averaging about 198% of the median value on April 1.  The 
water year precipitation through April 1 averaged 159% of the normal (medium value) across the basin.  
The Provo River basin had corresponding April 1  averages of 207% of median snowpack and 170% of 
medium precipitation. Figures 4.2 to 4.4 are seasonal graphs for some SNOTEL sites in the target area.      
 
  
Figure 4.1 Seeding during the 202 2-2023 season (red), in compari son to a linear usage of budgeted hours 
through the season (diagonal line). 
 

16 
 
Table 4-1 
Storm dates and number of generators used, 
2022-2023 season. 
Storm No. Date(s) No. of Generators 
Used No. of Hours 
1 December 11-13 8 224.75 
2 December 15 7 65 
3 December 21 6 54.5 
4 December 27-28 8 139 
5 December 31 2 13.5 
6 January 6 3 23 
7 January 10-11 8 138.75 
8 January 15 8 62.5 
9 January 17-18 1 17.25 
10 January 27-28 5  102 
11 February 5 7 45.25 
12 February 6 3 13 
13 February 8 6 30 
14 February 21 7 43.25 
15 February 27-28 8 102.5 
16 March 4-5 4 56 
17 March 5-6 6 76 
18 March 8 4 18 
19 March 12 5 25 
20 March 15 4 37 
21 March 20 4 32 
22 March 22 2 15.75 
Season Total --- --- 1330 
 
 
17 
 
 
Figure 4.2 NRCS SNOTEL snow water content plot for October 1, 2022 through May 30, 2022 for the Trial 
Lake, UT SNOTEL Site. Black line is the 2022-23 season data. Green represents the median, while 
purple and red are the historical max and min values respectively. 

18 
 
 
Figure 4.3     NRCS SNOTEL snow water content plot for October 1, 2022 through May 30, 2023 for Chalk Creek 
#1, UT SNOTEL site. Black line is the 2022 -23 season data. Green represents the median, while 
purple and red are the historical max and min values respectively. 

 
20 
 
 
 
Figure 4.4    NRCS SNOTEL snow water content plot for October 1 , 2022 through May 30, 2023 for Beaver 
Divide, UT SNOTEL site.  Black line is the 2022 -23 season data. Green represents the median, 
while purple and red are the historical max and min values respectively.  
In operational practice, the project meteorologist, with the aid of continually updated online weather 
information, monitored each approaching storm. If the storm parameters met the seedability criteria 
presented in Table 2-1, and if no seeding curtailments or suspensions were in effect, an appropriate array 
of seeding generators was ignited and then adjusted as evolving conditions required.  Seeding continued 
as long as conditions were favorable and precipitating clouds remained over the target area.  The 
operation of the seeding sites is not a simple “all -or-nothing” situation. Individual seeding sites are 
selected and run based on their location, and targeting considerations based on storm attributes. 
4.1 Operational Summary 
A brief synopsis of seeded (or otherwise significant) storm events during the operational seeding period 
is provided below. All times are local (MST/MDT) unless otherwise noted. References to wind direction in 
meteorology correspond to the direction that the wind is coming from (the upwind direction).  The 700 
mb level (~9,500 feet above sea level during the winter) temperature in the atmosphere is often 
referenced, given that the t emperature near mountain crest height is an important consideration for 
cloud seeding. 
December 2022 
The month of December 202 2 featured an active weather pattern and above normal 
precipitation/snowfall.  There  were five seeded storm events during the month.  Figure 4.5 shows 
December 2022 precipitation across the region as a percentage of average (mean) monthly totals.  

 
21 
 
 
Figure 4.5 December 2022 precipitation, percent of normal 
The weather pattern on December 11 th consisted of a deep trough that enveloped California and the 
entire Great Basin Region. Strong, dry and warm southerly flow was occurring across Utah ahead of this 
large trough and its associated cold frontal boundary. 700mb temperatures through the afternoon hours 
on the 11 th climbed up to near -2°C and southerly winds were gusting upwards of 45 -55 knots. The 
associated frontal boundary finally pushed eastward and across the program area after 1800 MST on the 

 
22 
 
11th which allowed a broad area of moderate to  heavy snow to fill in over northern Utah. 700mb 
temperatures dropped to near -9°C overnight into the morning hours of the 12th, but the flow continued 
to remain southerly. Several seeding sites that are favorable in a southerly flow regime were turned on at 
1830 MST on the 11 th and remained on overnight into the morning of the 12 th. As the core of the large 
trough moved overhead Utah, then downstream into Colorado on the 12th into the 13th, the flow shifted 
northwesterly and additional moisture was funneled into northern Utah. This allowed snow showers to 
continue across the program area throughout the 12th and into the morning hours of the 13th before drier 
air finally settled in and snow showers tapered off after 1200 MST on the 13 th.  Areal observations 
indicated 0.3-1.0 inches of liquid water equivalent was recorded across the program. 
Light snow developed over northern Utah around 0000 MST on the 15 th and then continued throughout 
the morning and early afternoon hours  as a weak and quick mo ving trough slid northwest to southeast 
across Utah. Moisture was rather limited with this system due to 700mb temperatures being very cold 
and around -15°C. Even though this was considered a marginal storm, seeding operations were conducted 
from 0700 MST until snow showers tapered off after 1600 MST. Up to 0.3” of liquid water equivalent were 
recorded in the target area. 
A very cold frontal boundary riding southeast through Wyoming and Colorado delivered a glancing blow 
to northern Utah during the afternoo n and evening of December 21 st. Moisture embedded within 
southwesterly flow ahead of the incoming front allowed spotty snow showers to develop over the 
program on the morning hours of the 21st, which continued into the afternoon hours. The cold front then 
arrived in northern Utah around 1600 MST and pushed southward across the western Uintas between 
1700-1800 MST. A brief burst of moderate to heavy snow accompanied the frontal passage and winds 
shifted from southwesterly to northwesterly. Temperatures also quickly dropped with the passage of the 
front with 700mb temperatures falling from -8°C to near -18°C. CNG sites were activated in the morning 
hours of the 21st and continued to run until 2100 MST, when precipitation finally tapered off. Between 0.3 
and 0.9 inches of SWE was observed throughout the target area.  
A strong Pacific jet streak and attendant Atmospheric River pushed into  northern and central California 
on the 27 th. Low-level moisture advection along the leading edge of this plume of moisture spread into 
northern Utah during the afternoon and early evening hours on the 2 7th. This brough t a period of  
moderate and heavy precipitation to the area within a mild southwesterly flow regime. Given that 700mb 
temperatures were around -2°C with this initial surge of moisture, seeding operations were held off.  An 
associated cold front then dropped southward and through Utah on the evening of the 27th, reaching the 
program around 2000 MST. In the wak e of this cold front, a favorable window for orographic snowfall 
developed underneath a moist and cold northwesterly flow pattern. CNG sites were activated right as the 
cold front pushed into the target area around 2000 MST on the 27th and ran overnight and through most 
of the day on the 28 th before precipitation finally came to an end after 1800 MST. Up to 1.3” of liquid 
water equivalent were recorded in the target area. 
 
23 
 
A strong cold front quickly blasted southeast and across northern Utah during the morning and afternoon 
hours on the 26 th. A convective snow squall developed along the leading edge of the cold front early in 
the morning on the 26 th with warm southwesterly flow in place out ahead of it. As the cold front moved 
into the Western Uintas during the afternoon on 26th, snow rapidly intensified and became moderate to 
heavy for a few brief hours. Snow decreased once the cold front passed through the area later in the 
afternoon, then eventually came to an end early in the evening as the cold front exi ted Utah. CNG sites 
were active right as the cold front pushed into the target area and ran into the early evening hours of the 
16th before precipitation finally came to an end. Areal observations indicated that up to one inch of liquid 
water equivalent was recorded. 
A positively tilted trough developed over the eastern Pacific Ocean on the morning of December 31 st. 
Ahead of this developing system, an east to west oriented mid-level warm front had become situated over 
central Utah. As the trough approached Utah during the late morning hours on the 31st, modest moisture 
transport within a southwesterly flow pattern overran the warm front and caused moderate precipitation 
to fill in over the program area. Seeding CNG sites were activated on the morning of the 31st as satellite 
imagery and radar returns revealed that good orographic precipitation occurring as the moisture rich flow 
was up sloped into the terrain. As the large trough track further east and deepened in the lee of the Sierra 
Nevada, it forced the flow to turn southeasterly to easterly over the program area during the evening and 
overnight hours on the 31 st. Snow showers continued through the night, but seeding operations were 
concluded due to the flow no longer being favorable for targeting the program area.  
January 2023 
The weather pattern remained very active through the month of January and featured seve ral strong 
storms that brought above average precipitation to the region. Seeding was conducted for the Western 
Uintas during five storm events in January. Figure 4.6 shows January 2023 precipitation across the state 
as a percentage of average (mean) monthly totals. 
 
24 
 
 
Figure 4.6  January 2023 precipitation, percent of normal 
A decaying atmospheric river associated with a splitting trough pushed into northern Utah on the evening 
of January 5 th. Warm advection ahead of  this atmospheric river was accompanied by an increase in 
moisture aloft, which led to the development of widespread stratiform snow over northern Utah late in 
overnight into the early morning hours of the 6th. No seeding activity occurred during the overnight hours 
of the 5 th into the 6 th due to 700mb temperatures being on the mild side (around -2/-3°C) and the mid -

 
25 
 
levels of the atmosphere presenting stability issues. As the open wave trough finally moved downstream 
into Colorado on the morning of the 6 th, the flow aloft shifted from southwesterly to northwesterly and 
700mb temperatures cooled to near -8°C. CNG sites were activated on the morning of the 6th and ran 
through the afternoon hours . By 1800 MST  on the 6 th, moisture had finally begun to decrease a nd 
ultimately led to the end of snow over the area as well as seeding operations. Storm total precipitation 
was generally in the 0.3-0.5” range (liquid water equivalent).   
Utah came under the influence of a rather moist southwesterly flow pattern on the m orning of January 
10 as the first in a series of troughs slid across the western U.S. Moderate to heavy precipitation developed 
over northern Utah during the pre -dawn hours on the 10 th. No seeding activity occurred with this first 
round of precipitation due to 700mb temperatures holding near -3°C and the profile of the atmosphere 
exhibiting strong stability in the lower levels. Precipitation briefly tapered off during the afternoon hours 
as this first wave exited off to the east. A secondary and much larger  trough then pushed a strong cold 
front eastward and across the area with the front reaching the seeding area around 1800 MST. The front 
was accompanied by a band of heavy snow, a few lightning strikes, and an abrupt wind shift from 
southwesterly to northwesterly. 700mb temperatures also fell behind the frontal passage from around -
3°C to near -10°C. Seeding CNG sites favorable in northwesterly flow were activated ahead of the frontal 
passage around 1600 MST and remained on overnight into the morning hours of January 11 th. Snow 
showers then tapered off after 1200 MST on the 11 th and it was at this time that seeding activity was 
concluded.  Storm total precipitation ranged from 0.6”-1.3” of snow water equivalent. 
An upper-level trough approaching the Great Basin region on the evening of January 14th impinged a moist 
southerly flow pattern over northern Utah. As a result, widespread precipitation filled in over the program 
area and continued overnight into the pre -dawn hours of the 15 th. No seeding occurred dur ing this 
overnight period because the Salt Lake City upper air balloon sounding revealed that there was a stable 
layer present in the mid -levels and the surface flow over the region was more southeasterly than 
southerly. Snow showers continued throughout t he day on the 15 th but as the axis of the trough finally 
passed overhead Utah during the late morning hours, 700mb temperatures fell from near -5°C to near -
9°C. and the flow aloft shifted from southeasterly to west/northwesterly. CNG sites were activated during 
the late morning hours and remained on until snow showers tapered off after 1800 MST. Total snow water 
equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.1”-0.3”. 
An upper -level trough with a few embedded shortwave features made its way across the Great 
Basin/Desert Southwest region early on the morning of January 17. A deformation band of precipitation 
developed on the northwestern periphery of this trough axis late in the evening of the 16 th and became 
situated over northwest Utah. Further east and over the seeding area, a dry slot developed and kept 
conditions dry.  No seeding activity occurred from the evening of the 16th into the morning of the 17th due 
to the wind direction being southeasterly and the dry slot moving overhead around 02/0300 MST. One of 
the embedded shortwaves then rotated across Arizona and eventually evolved into a closed low across 
 
26 
 
the 4-Corners by late morning/afternoon. As this occurred, the deformation band shifted southeastward 
and spread snow showers back over the seeding area. CNG sites were activated around 1430 MST as the 
flow shifted from southeasterly to northwesterly. Snow showers and seeding operations continued 
through the night and then came to an end after 0800 MST on th e 18th after conditions dried out.  Total 
snow water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.1”-0.2”. 
The last week of January featured an upper-level pattern that consisted of a broad ridge of high pressure 
across the eastern Pacific with a series of shortwave troughs diving southward out of the Pacific Northwest 
and into the Great Basin region. One such wave dropped southward and clipped far northeast Utah during 
the afternoon and evening hours of the 27 th. As the wave approached Utah late in the af ternoon hours, 
snow showers began to develop and increase in intensity. Snow showers persisted through the night with 
the flow remaining northwesterly and 700mb temperatures dropping from -8°C to near -12°C. Seeding 
CNG sites were activated as soon as snow  started increasing around 1500 MST on the 27 th. Seeding 
continued overnight and up until snow showers ended around 1200 MST on the 28th. SWE totals from this 
event were in the 0.2”-0.6” range. 
February 2022 
The weather pattern remained quite active through the month of February.  A couple of weak storms 
impacted the area near the beginning of the month which was followed by a period of drier and calmer 
weather conditions through the mid -month. A long wave trough pattern then developed across the 
western U.S. starting around February 20/21. This opened the door for an extended period of cold and 
wet weather, with several significant systems affecting the program through the last week of the month. 
Five storms were considered suitable for seeding operati ons during the month of February.   Figure 4.7 
shows the percentage of normal February precipitation across the region. 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
Figure 4.7  February 2023 precipitation, percent of normal 
A somewhat large and disorganized trough made its way across Nevada and Ut ah during the afternoon 
hours of February 5 th then continued eastward into Colorado in the evening. A north -to-south-oriented 
frontal boundary associated with this trough was forced eastward and across Utah. Southerly winds ahead 
of the front shifted west to northwesterly behind its passage and 700mb temperatures fell to near -12°C. 

 
28 
 
Snow showers first developed over the program area around 0800 MST on the 5th but initially struggled 
to reach the surface due to the presence of a dry layer . As the atmosphere moistened up through the 
afternoon hours, snow showers filled and continued until skies cleared out after 2000 MST. Total snow 
water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.1”-0.4”. 
The next in the series of storms began to impact  Utah on the morning of February 6th. This next trough 
dug southward out of Idaho during the early morning hours then pushed off to the south later in the 
afternoon and evening. As the system dug southward in the early morning hours of the 6th, it brought a 
reinforcing shot of colder temperatures and  a renewed burst of light snow . Light snow shower  activity 
persisted over the area through the early afternoon hours before dissipating and drying out  after 1300 
MST. Total snow water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.1”-0.4”. 
A fast-moving cold front swept southward and across Utah during the afternoon hours of the 8 th, then 
quickly exited off to the southeast during the evening. The front turned out to be quite strong as it moved 
southward and brought a brief period of heavy snow, several lightning strikes, gusty northwesterly winds, 
and a rapid drop in temperatures. Snow showers and seeding operations first developed around 1500 
MST as the cold front moved in and continued until conditions quickly dried out after 2000 MST. Storm 
total SWE for this event was light and ranged from 0.1-0.3”.  
After a week of dry weather, a significant winter storm brought heavy snowfall to the seedin g area the 
21st into the 22 nd. A frontogenetical cold frontal boundary shifted southward into northern Utah during 
the afternoon of the 21st where it became stalled over the program area overnight into the morning hours 
of the 22nd. Southwesterly flow ahead of the boundary became disorganized by the evening hours of the 
21st with the flow varying from southeasterly to east/northeasterly. This caused the boundary to slowly 
pivot to more of a southwest to northeast orientation and allowed heavy snow occurring  along the 
boundary to continue overnight. 700mb temperatures slowly fell through the evening of the 21 st where 
they bottomed out near –10/-11°C. Several seeding CNG sites were activated during the early afternoon 
hours of the 21st and remained on until the flow at the surface became unfavorable after 2000 MST. Total 
snow water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.5-1.2”. 
A weak shortwave disturbance grazed far northern Utah overnight on the 26th into the morning of the 27th 
and brought an increase in moisture within a southerly flow regime. This caused snow showers to develop 
across the seeding area which continued throughout the morning hours on the 27th. No seeding occurred 
from the evening of the 26th into the morning hours of the 27th as a stable layer near 700mb was observed 
to be present on the Salt Lake City upper air sounding. A trailing secondary shortwave trough then pushed 
eastward out of California and tracked overhead Utah on the evening of the 27th. Precipitation increased 
in coverage and intensity as this trough moved overhead and cooling 700mb temperatures helped erode 
the stable layer that had been present all day. Seeding CNG sites were activated around 1800 MST on the 
 
29 
 
27th and remained on overnight into the early morning hours of the 28th before being turned off as snow 
showers diminished. Total snow water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.5-1.1”. 
March 2023 
The month of March was very active and featured several significant storm events that brought well above 
normal snowfall to the region.  By late March, it became apparent that flooding risks outweighed further 
benefits of the seeding program  for the season.  Although the higher elevation SNOTEL sites that were 
established by the Division of Water Resources for program suspension criteria in this area were still a bit 
below their pre -defined suspension thresholds, it was observed that lower elevation snowpack was 
reaching unprecedented highs.     Given this, the seeding program was suspended and ended for the 
season a week early on March 24. Figure 4.8 shows the regional March precipitation as a percentage of 
normal. 
 
30 
 
 
Figure 4.8  March 2023 precipitation, percent of normal 
A deep longwave began to develop just off the coast of the Pacific Northwest on the 4 th of March which 
put Utah under the influence of southwesterly flow pattern. One of several shortwave troughs rotating 
around this main low, ejected  northeastward and across Utah during the afternoon and evening hours. 
Increasing mid -level moisture within the southwesterly flow pattern coupled with low -level warm 
advection and allowed snow to develop across the program area around midday, which then i ncreased 

 
31 
 
through the evening hours of the 4th as the wave and an associated cold front at 700mb tracked eastward 
and through Utah. The frontal boundary was accompanied by a band of convective snow, an abrupt wind 
shift from southwesterly to westerly, and s ignificant drop in temperatures. Snow decreased in intensity 
once the front pushed just south of the program area after midnight on the 5th, but lingering moisture in 
the cold westerly flow pattern kept snow showers lingering up until 0900 MST on the 5th.  Storm total SWE 
was in the 0.4-0.6” range. 
A broad longwave trough continued to remain centered just off the coast of the Pacific Northwest on 
March 5 th with additional shortwave troughs rotating around the large feature. Utah remained on the 
downstream side of this deep low with the flow staying westerly to southwesterly in direction. One of the 
shortwave troughs crossed Utah on the evening of the 4 th into the morning of the 5 th and pushed a cold 
frontal boundary southward across the state. This front stalled over central Utah by 0900 MST on the 5th 
with conditions further north and over the program area drying out through the afternoon hours. The dry 
break was brief as another embedded trough ejected away from the main low and moved through Utah 
on the evening of the 5th into the morning of the 6th. This forced the stalled boundary back northward and 
over the program area which brought another round of moderate to heavy snow with in a westerly flow 
regime. As a result, several CNG sites were activated on the evening of the 5th and ran overnight into the 
morning hours of the 6 th before ending. Total snow water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 
0.6-0.9”. 
A long wave trough pattern remained engulfed over the Pacific Northwest  on the 8 th with several 
shortwaves rotating around the main low . Weak warm advection developed over northern Utah on the 
morning of the 8th and caused light snowfall to develop over the area which continued into the afternoon 
hours. Snow showers began to increase during the early evening hours of the 8th as an upper-level trough 
and its associated frontal zone approached the area from the northwest. CNG sites were activated around 
1400 MST and ran late into the evening of the 8th. Dry and very cold air started to settle in across the area 
during after midnight on the 9 th which brought an end to snow shower activity as well as seeding 
operations. Total snow water equivalent (SWE) for this event ranged from 0.1-0.3”. 
Weak warm advection on the morning of the 12 th combined with lingering mid -level moisture, daytime 
heating and a very subtle shortwave trough to bring scattered snow shower activity to the program area 
during the afternoon hours . Seeding was initiated around 1200 MDT as numerous showers and 
thunderstorms developed over the Uintas and continued until showers diminished after 1800 MDT. Storm 
total SWE for this event was light and ranged between 0.1-0.3”. 
A significant Atmospheric River combined with a frontal boundary and produced a band of heavy snowfall 
across northern Utah on the morning of the 15th which slowly sagged southward and across the rest of 
the state throughout the day. Mild southwesterly flow ahead of the front shifted northwesterly behind its 
passage and 700mb temperatures fell from near -2C in the morning to near -9C in the evening . Heavy 
 
32 
 
precipitation also transitioned to more showery behind the frontal passage where scattered showers and 
thunderstorms lingeried up until drier air spread in and conditions dried out after 1800 MDT. Upwards of 
1.0” of SWE was observed across the program area. 
A large trough made its way onshore and into California on the evening of the 19 th then pushed into far 
northwest Utah during the afternoon hours of the 20th. Deep lift and daytime heating ahead of this trough 
allowed scattered showers and thunderstorms to pop up over the terrain of northern Utah. Showers and 
storms continued over the region through the e arly evening hours before tapering off and ending after 
2000 MDT as the trough pushed off to the east. Seeding was conducted to target these scattered showers 
from roughly 1200 MDT through 2000 MDT. All in all, the seeding area picked up around 0.1-0.3” of SWE. 
A splitting upper-level trough made its way through Utah during the early morning hours on the 20 th of 
March. The southern portion of the split system dug too far south to have an appreciable impact on the 
western Uinta target area. The northern section, however, pushed a weakening cold front southeast and 
across Utah on the 20th, with it crossing the program area between late morning and early afternoon. 
Strong, dry, and warm southwesterly flow ahead of the cold front quickly turned northwest followi ng its 
passage where it caused 700mb temperatures to fall from -2°C down to -10°C in its wake.  Precipitation 
was largely confined to right along and behind the front and only lasted for a few hours before conditions 
dried out early in the evening. Seeding  operations were activated right as the front was pushing across 
the area and ceased early in the evening as conditions dried out. Around 0.1 -0.2” of SWE fell across the 
program area.  
The last seeding event of the 2022-2023 season took place on March 22nd. It was the result of a broad and 
moist Pacific storm system that gradually slid eastward and forced a cold front into Utah during the 
afternoon hours. An area of moderate to heavy precipitation occurring within a southwesterly flow regime 
initially developed across the area early in the morning. As the cold front pushed in and crossed the area 
in the afternoon, ongoing precipitation turned showery and the flow aloft shifted from southwesterly to 
northwesterly. Some of the showers developed into weak thu ndershowers during the afternoon hours , 
which can be favorable for cloud seeding. As a result, seeding operations were activated early in the 
afternoon and ran until conditions began to dry out early in the evening. Total SWE was limited with this 
system and only amounted to around 0.2-0.4”.  
 
33 
 
5. ASSESSMENT OF SEEDING EFFECTS 
5.1 Background 
The seemingly simple issue of determining the effects of cloud seeding has received considerable 
attention over the years. Evaluating the results of a cloud seeding program is often a rather difficult task, 
however, and the results, especially single-season indications, should be viewed with appropriate caution. 
The primary reason for the difficulty stems from the large natural variability in the amounts of 
precipitation that occur in a given area. The ability to detect a seeding effect becomes a function of the 
size of the seeding increase relative to the natural variability in the precipitation pattern. Larger seeding 
effects can be detected more readily, and with a smaller numb er of seeded cases than are required to 
detect smaller increases. 
Historically, among all cloud seeding project types, the most consistent results have been observed in 
wintertime seeding programs in mountainous areas, with results indicating 5 -15 percent increases in 
seasonal precipitation. Establishing an accurate approximation of the effects of seeding within a single 
operational season can be challenging. Historically a rigorous study of seeding increase estimates required 
a multi-year randomized seeding evaluation. This multi -year assessment method made it impossible to 
address financial concerns in real time and encumbered projects with substantial operational limitations.  
To provide our clients with greater decisioning power, we developed a mathemati cal evaluation process 
that enables us to perform single and multiple season evaluations. This model is based on a “target and 
control” comparison of a given variable that is affected by seeding (precipitation or snowpack) between 
a “target” area (where se eding occurred for the season being assessed) and a “control” area (where no 
seeding occurred for the season being assessed)  
After identifying appropriate control sites, data for the selected variable (e.g., precipitation) is analyzed 
for both the “target ” area and the “control” area for years where no seeding was performed in either 
area. A mathematical model (regression) is developed to determine the relationship between 
precipitation in the “target” area and precipitation in the “control” area under natural circumstances. This 
mathematical model is then used to analyze the selected variable in years where seeding did not occur in 
the “control” area but did occur in the “target” area. Using this model with data for the control sites, a 
reasonable prediction can be made of what would have transpired in the target area had no seeding 
occurred, then compare this to what actually happened in the target area. Consistent differences between 
the predicted and observed target area data may be attributed to cloud seeding effects, although with a 
low level of confidence until sufficient seeded season data is accumulated. 
This target and control technique works well where good mathematical correlation can be found between 
target and control area precipitation. Generally, the closer the two areas are geographically, and the more 
similar they are in terms of elevation and topography, the higher the correlation and the more certain the 
 
34 
 
results. Areas selected that are too close together, however, can be subject to contami nation of the 
control sites by seeding activities. This can result in an underestimate of the seeding effect. For 
precipitation and snowpack assessments, a correlation coefficient (r) of 0.90 or better would be 
considered excellent, and correlations around 0.85 would be very good. A correlation coefficient of 0.90 
would indicate that over 80 percent of the variance (r 2) in the historical data set is explained by the 
regression equation used to estimate the subject variable (expected precipitation or snowpac k) in the 
seeded years. Correlations less than about 0.80 are still acceptable, but it would likely take much longer 
to attach any statistical significance to the apparent results of seeding. 
5.2 Considerations in the Development of Target/Control Evaluations 
With the advent of the Natural Resources Conservation Service's (NRCS) SNOTEL automated data 
acquisition system in the late 1970's, access to precipitation and snowpack (water equivalent) data in 
mountainous locations became routine. Before the automated system was developed, these data had to 
be acquired by having NRCS personnel visit the site to take necessary measurements. This is still done at 
some sites although most have been automated. Historically, Utah has had snowpack measurements 
taken at (usually) monthly intervals. Precipitation and snowpack data used in the analysis were obtained 
from the NRCS and/or from the National Climatic Data Center. The current season NRCS data are 
considered provisional and subject to quality control analysis by the NRCS. 
 
There have been, and continue to be, multiple cloud seeding programs conducted in the State of Utah. 
Consequently, potential control areas that are unaffected by cloud seeding are somewhat limited. This is 
complicated by the fact that the best correlated control sites are generally those closest to the target area, 
and SNOTEL measurement sites in Utah have likely been affected at some time by numerous historical 
and current seeding programs.  
Our normal approach in selecting control sites for a new proj ect includes looking for sites that will 
geographically bracket the intended target area. The reason for this approach is that we have observed 
that some winter seasons are dominated by a particular upper airflow pattern while other seasons are 
dominated by other flow patterns. These different upper airflow patterns and resultant storm tracks often 
result in heavier precipitation in one area versus the other. For example, a strong El Nino pattern may 
favor the production of heavy winter precipitation in the  southwestern United States while a strong La 
Nina pattern may favor the production of below normal precipitation in the southwest. The inclusion of 
control sites at somewhat varying latitudes (north-south), helping to bracket the target area, may improve 
the estimation of natural target area precipitation under variable upper airflow patterns. 
 Another consideration in the selection of control sites for the development of an historical target/control 
relationship is one of data quality. A potential control site may be rejected due to poor data quality if the 
data significantly diverges over time from other sites in the area. SNOTEL sites, the type used in the 
 
35 
 
evaluation of the Western Uintas program, typically have reliable long -term records with external 
variables (such as terrain aspect and surrounding vegetation) carefully selected or maintained.  
5.3 Evaluation of Snow Water Content 
Historically, the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) routinely measured the mountain snowpack at snow 
courses once or twice per mo nth, usually starting in January and continuing until May or June. 
Measurements were made by visiting the snow course (commonly a group of ten measurement points) 
and taking core samples of the snow to determine the water content and depth of the snow at e ach 
designated location along the course. Though this manual method is still being used at some sites, 
beginning in the 1980s, the NRCS (formerly the SCS) automated SNOTEL system has provided daily 
measurements of snow water (and precipitation) at many of the mountain sites. With the use of a snow 
pillow, the water equivalent of the snowpack can be determined remotely by reading the weight of the 
snow on the snow pillow. The water content within the snowpack is important since, after consideration 
of antece dent soil moisture conditions, it ultimately determines how much water will be available as 
runoff when the snow melt occurs. Hydrologists routinely use snow water content to make forecasts of 
streamflow during the spring and early summer months. As with t he precipitation storage gauge and 
SNOTEL precipitation gauge networks, Utah also has access to an excellent snow course and SNOTEL snow 
pillow reporting system via the NRCS. Many of the same reporting mountain sites are configured with 
collocated precipitation and snowpack measurements. Consequently, it was judged important to evaluate 
the effects of seeding on snowpack as well. 
There are some potential pitfalls with snowpack measurements that must be recognized when using snow 
water content to evaluate seeding effectiveness. One problem that can occur is that not all winter storms 
are cold, and sometimes rain as well as snow falls in the mountains. This can lead to a disparity between 
precipitation totals (which measure everything that falls) and snowpack water content (which measures 
only the water held in the snowpack at a particular time). Also, warm periods can occur between 
snowstorms particularly in the spring season. If a significant warm period occurs, some of the precipitation 
that fell as snow may melt or sublimate by the time the next snow course measurement is made. This can 
also lead to a greater disparity between snow water content and precipitation at lower elevations (where 
more snow will melt in warm weather) than at higher elevations. 
Another factor that can have an effect on the indicated results of the snowpack evaluation is the date on 
which the snowpack measurement was made. These measurements are generally made near the end of 
the month at the snow course sites and, since the advent of SNOTEL, are now made daily where possible. 
Prior to SNOTEL, and at those sites where snow courses are still measured by visiting the site, the 
measurement is recorded on the day it was made. In some cases, because of scheduling issues or stormy 
weather, the manual snow course measurements may have been made as much as several days before 
or after the end of the month. This can lead to a disparity in the snowpack water content readings when 
 
36 
 
comparing one group (such as a control) with another control or targ et group. Normally, however, 
snowpack measurements are made within a few days of the intended date.  
April 1st snowpack readings are widely used for runoff forecasting since they usually closely represent the 
maximum snow accumulation for the winter season. Most streamflow and reservoir storage forecasts are 
made on the basis of the April 1 st snowpack data. For that reason, and because three to four months of 
seeding are generally represented in the April 1 st snowpack measurements, April 1st was selected as the 
date for our snowpack analyses. 
Target/Control Sites and Regression Equation Development 
The procedure was essentially the same as what was done for the precipitation evaluation, e.g., control 
and target area sites were selected, and average values for each were determined. Seven target area snow 
measurement sites were utilized for the Western Uintas Program, as shown in Figure 5.1. Table 5 -1 
provides the target area site names, elevations, and locations of these sites. The average elevation of the 
target sites is 8,637 feet MSL.  
 
Figure 5.1  Western Uintas target area and snowpack target sites 

 
37 
 
Table 5-1 
Target area snowpack sites 
Map Label Site Name Elev. (Ft) Lat. (N) Long. (W) 
1 Chalk Creek #2 8,200 40° 54' 111° 04' 
2 Chalk Creek #1 9,100 40° 51' 111° 04' 
3 Smith & Morehouse 7,600 40° 47' 111° 06' 
4 Redden Mine, Lower 8,500 40° 41' 111° 13' 
5 Hayden Fork 9,100 40° 48' 110° 53' 
6 Trial Lake 9,960 40° 41' 110° 57' 
7 Currant Creek 8,000 40° 21’ 111° 05’ 
 
The five control sites are located in southern Idaho, northeastern Nevada and central Utah as shown in 
Figure 5.2. Control area site names, elevations and locations are provided in Table 5 -2. The elevations of 
the control area sites average 6,887 feet (MSL). The non-seeded seasons were 1970-1988 and 1997-2000 
(a total of 23 seasons). Many more historical seasons were available for the snow water content 
analyses than for precipitation data, 23 versus 11 seasons. As a consequence, the snow water content 
analyses results are likely to be much more reliable than the precipitation analyses for this particular 
seeding program, and are the focus of this evaluation section. 
 
Figure 5.2  Western Uintas target area and snow control sites (squares) 

 
38 
 
Table 5-2 
Control area snowpack sites 
Map Label Site Name Site ID Elev. (Ft) Lat. 
(N) Long. (W) 
A Badger Gulch SC, ID 14G03 6,660 42°06' 114°10' 
B Big Bend, NV 15H04S 6,700 41°46' 115°43' 
C Magic Mountain, ID 14G02S 6,880 42°11' 114°18' 
D Willow Flat SC, ID 11G04 6,070 42°08' 111°38' 
E Strawberry Divide, UT 11J08S 8,123 40°11' 111°13' 
 
  
The linear regression equation developed from the historical relationship between the average control 
snowpack data and the average target snowpack data for April 1st was the following: 
YC = 0.741 (XO) + 6.36 (4)    
where YC is the calculated average snow water content (inches) for the seven-station target and XO is the 
five-station control average observed snow water content for April 1st. 
Linear Regression Snowpack Analysis 
When the observed average control snow water content ( 22.90 inches) for April 1 st, 202 3 period was 
inserted in equation (1), the most probable average target area snow water content was calculated to be 
23.33 inches. The actual observed average precipitation for the target group was 27.00 inches. This yields 
a single-season ratio of 1.16, which (for this single season) is itself not indicative of a seeding effect. As 
stated before, the single-season evaluation results carry very little statistical significance. The strength of 
the evaluation lies in the multi-year results as shown below. 
The combined (26-year) snow water linear regression evaluation for April 1 st, for the Western Uintas  
target sites, yields a ratio of 1.03. This long-term mean excludes water years 2004 and 2015 during which 
abnormal early snowmelt occurred, and thus includes 26 seeded seasons. The implied 3% increase based 
on the snowpack evaluation is equivalent to an a verage of about 0. 53 inches more water over the 
watersheds than might have occurred without the cloud seeding. The snowpack evaluation for the seeded 
water years is summarized in Table 5-3.  
 
39 
 
Table 5-3 
Summary of April 1st snow water content evaluation, 
using the Linear Regression technique. 
Water  
Year 
Control 
Average 
Target 
Observed 
Target 
Predicted 
Obs/Pred 
Ratio 
Excess 
Water 
(inches) 
1989 17.22 18.04 19.12 0.94 -1.08 
1990 6.94 14.79 11.50 1.29 3.28 
1991 10.34 15.00 14.02 1.07 0.98 
1992 3.44 10.29 8.91 1.15 1.38 
1993 16.02 21.34 18.23 1.17 3.11 
1995 11.96 18.43 15.22 1.21 3.21 
2001 6.62 10.53 11.27 0.93 -0.74 
2002 14.86 14.21 17.37 0.82 -3.16 
2003 7.04 12.31 11.58 1.06 0.74 
2005 14.26 21.09 16.93 1.25 4.16 
2006 21.12 21.81 22.01 0.99 -0.20 
2007 7.12 10.16 11.64 0.87 -1.48 
2008 17.28 20.07 19.16 1.05 0.91 
2009 14.06 17.17 16.78 1.02 0.39 
2010 11.22 11.84 14.67 0.81 -2.83 
2011 20.06 24.50 21.22 1.15 3.28 
2013 9.14 10.69 13.13 0.81 -2.45 
2014 11.16 16.61 14.63 1.14 1.98 
2016 14.74 14.71 17.28 0.85 -2.57 
2017 16.68 23.46 18.72 1.25 4.74 
2018 7.40 10.29 11.84 0.87 -1.56 
2019 18.44 21.64 20.02 1.08 1.62 
2020 14.78 16.80 17.31 0.97 -0.51 
2021 11.54 12.30 14.91 0.82 -2.61 
2022 8.36 12.20 12.55 0.97 -0.35 
2023 22.90 27.00 23.33 1.16 3.67 
26 years 12.87 16.43 15.90 1.033 0.53 
  
Multiple Linear Regression Snowpack Analysis 
A multiple linear regression analysis has been conducted for snowpack, and exhibits much lower seasonal 
variability in the indicated observed/predicted ratios than does the corresponding linear regression. The 
r value is also much better than for the stand ard linear regression (0.90 vs. 0.79). This implies less 
 
40 
 
background noise in this equation, and thus likely more reliable estimates of the true seeding effects. The 
results of the multiple regression snowpack analyses are provided in Table 5 -4, implying ab out a 6% 
increase over the long term (obtained from the ratio of 1.0 6 shown in bold in the bottom row of that 
table). In the case of the Western Uintas evaluations, the multiple linear snowpack analysis is by far the 
strongest mathematically and is likely the most reliable for evaluation of this program.  
A double ratio analysis using snowpack data (similar to that for precipitation) resulted in a ratio of 1.13, 
implying a 13% increase in the target area (relative to the control) during the seeded seasons. However, 
this result is a high outlier in these evaluations and may not be representative of the actual seeding effects. 
NAWC’s best estimate of seeding effects for the Western Uintas program is about a 6% increase, as 
obtained in the multiple linear regression snowpack analysis. 
 
41 
 
Table 5-4 
Summary of snow water content evaluation using the multiple linear regression technique.  
Water 
Year 
Magic 
Mtn, 
ID 
Badger 
Gulch, 
ID 
Willow 
Flat, ID 
Big 
Bend, 
NV 
Straw
berry 
Div, 
UT 
Target 
Observ
ed 
Snowp
ack 
Est 
Target 
Snow 
 
Obs/Pr
ed 
Ratio 
Excess 
Water 
(inches
) 1989 23.60 16.20 18.00 10.50 17.80 18.04 17.84 1.01 0.20 
1990 10.20 7.70 4.00 0.00 12.80 14.79 13.45 1.10 1.34 
1991 14.70 7.50 11.20 2.40 15.90 15.00 14.95 1.00 0.05 
1992 3.60 3.00 3.70 0.00 6.90 10.29 9.05 1.14 1.24 
1993 18.10 14.60 17.70 8.40 21.30 21.34 20.18 1.06 1.16 
1995 15.70 10.40 12.90 3.90 16.90 18.43 16.52 1.12 1.91 
2001 11.40 6.10 5.10 2.00 8.50 10.53 10.02 1.05 0.51 
2002 20.90 15.80 14.30 10.40 12.90 14.21 14.88 0.96 -0.66 
2003 10.60 4.20 8.10 2.00 10.30 12.31 10.71 1.15 1.61 
2005 16.70 9.80 14.90 7.70 22.20 21.09 18.68 1.13 2.40 
2006 28.20 18.20 21.00 14.50 23.70 21.81 21.03 1.04 0.78 
2007 14.00 5.20 6.00 1.80 8.60 10.16 9.51 1.07 0.65 
2008 20.00 16.80 19.00 11.60 19.00 20.07 19.16 1.05 0.91 
2009 20.40 10.20 15.50 10.10 14.10 17.17 13.50 1.27 3.67 
2010 15.70 11.20 10.80 8.40 10.00 11.84 11.97 0.99 -0.13 
2011 21.80 15.40 24.60 13.80 24.70 24.50 21.82 1.12 2.68 
2013 15.20 9.60 9.40 2.00 9.50 10.69 12.03 0.89 -1.34 
2014 17.70 11.40 10.20 2.20 14.30 16.61 15.18 1.09 1.43 
2016 22.40 14.70 14.80 9.50 12.30 14.71 14.11 1.04 0.61 
2017 19.80 15.10 15.20 10.10 23.20 23.46 20.64 1.14 2.82 
2018 12.70 6.90 7.10 2.70 7.60 10.29 9.79 1.05 0.49 
2019 21.20 17.70 19.00 10.40 23.90 21.64 22.32 0.97 -0.67 
2020 21.40 15.60 13.00 8.40 15.50 16.80 16.37 1.03 0.43 
2021 16.60 12.40 12.00 6.70 10.00 12.30 12.78 0.96 -0.48 
2022 14.90 7.00 7.00 2.00 10.90 12.20 11.50 1.06 0.70 
2023 
28.40 20.60 27.20 14.70 23.60 27.00 22.64 1.19 4.36 
 
28.40 20.60 27.20 14.70 23.60 27.00 22.64 1.19 4.36 
26 yrs 17.53 11.67 13.14 6.78 15.25 16.43 15.41 1.066 1.02 
5.4 Summary of Evaluation Results 
The April 1 st snowpack analyses for 2 6 seeded seasons (2004 and 2015 were excluded) yield 
observed/predicted ratios of 1.03 (linear) and 1.06 (multiple linear). The results using April 1st snowpack 
imply average increases of roughly 3% -6%, which seems reasonable for this program, particularly in 
comparison to results of similar programs in the western U.S. and nearby programs in Utah. The April 1 st 
snowpack evaluations are considered much more representative than the December-March precipitation 
evaluation (previously included in this section) due to a much longer historical period being available for 
the snow water versus precipitation evaluation of 23 versus 11 seasons, and a stronger statistical 
correlation (i.e., r value of 0.90).  Also, of interest in the case of the snowpack evaluations is  the much 
lower year -to-year variability observed in the results of the snowpack multiple linear evaluation, 
 
42 
 
suggesting that this particular equation is likely the best predictor of the “expected” natural target area 
precipitation based on the available control site snowpack data. This suggests a likely long-term average 
seeding effect in the neighborhood of 6% for this program.  
NAWC considers the Western Uintas evaluations to be conservative estimates of the effects of seeding 
for a variety of reasons. Fo r example, some months that were included in the “seeded” period actually 
were not seeded during all seasons. Also, one of the control sites (Strawberry Divide) is located in an area 
that has been seeded for another program during some winter seasons. The snowpack evaluations are 
also conservative because they are based upon April 1 st data. These data contain periods in the fall and 
early winter in which snowpack accumulated in the target area without any effects of seeding. This would 
dilute the indicated effects of seeding over the long term.  
Due in large part to the continually rising demand for water across the Rocky Mountain States, there are 
no longer any particularly good control sites. The few potential sites that reside close to the target area 
and have adequate historic records are all likely affected by other nearby cloud -seeding projects each 
winter, thus reducing the apparent gains derived from cloud seeding 
Another potential confounding issue in evaluating the effects of cloud seeding in the We stern Uintas 
target area is that the historical target/control evaluations seem to be impacted by urban air pollution, 
based upon an analysis performed and published by NAWC (Griffith et al., 2005). A copy of the paper on 
this topic was provided in the 200 5 report and is also available on NAWC’s website 
(www.nawcinc.com/nawcpapers.html). That analysis documented an approximate 16% decline in the 
November through March precipitation at Trial Lake during the period from 1956 to 2004.  Data more 
recent than thi s would be affected by cloud seeding as well, with the competing effects difficult to 
separate. 
The control area sites in northeastern Nevada and southwestern Idaho are primarily in unpopulated areas 
which would not be expected to be subject to the air pollution problems as discussed in the 2005 paper. 
On the other hand, from our investigations (Griffith et al., 2005) it appears that some of the target sites 
for the Western Uintas program are being negatively impacted by air pollution. The likely result the n is 
that the equations used to evaluate the program may be over -predicting the amount of “natural” 
precipitation (i.e., that which would occur without seeding) in the target area during the seeded periods. 
As a consequence, the evaluations of the program are likely indicating less of a seeding effect than is 
actually occurring.  
This situation was also considered in a study conducted by Givati and Rosenfeld (2004); they reported on 
an operational cloud seeding program being conducted in Israel, plus some a reas in California that are 
exhibiting these pollution impacts. A quote from the Givati and Rosenfeld study is as follows: “In this 
study, we avoided addressing the possible confounding effects of the glaciogenic cloud seeding of the 
orographic clouds in b oth Israel and California. If seeding did enhance precipitation, the effects in the 
absence of seeding may have been larger than indicated in this study.” In other words, cloud seeding may 
 
43 
 
potentially be offsetting the negative effects of air pollution on precipitation. For example, if air 
pollution was reducing December through March precipitation by 10% and cloud seeding was increasing 
precipitation by 10%, the evaluations that we have been conducting for the Western Uintas may indicate 
no effect even though there actually was a 10% increase due to cloud seeding. And the corollary is that 
without cloud seeding, the drop in precipitation due to pollution effects might be more pronounced.  
Appendix C contains additional information on the historical and seed ed years precipitation and snow 
water averages, regression equations and predicted and observed values.  
 
44 
 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The difficulties involved in predicting seasonal increases in snowpack resulting from cloud seeding have 
been thoroughly described in this report. With those realities and their potential impacts summarized, we 
offer the following statements regarding the seeding project effectiveness. 
The cumulative evaluation results using the regular and multiple linear regression techniques based on 
April 1st snow water content, indicate an estimated 3% to 6% seasonal average increase. These are 
considered to be the best, most credible (although perhaps still conservative) estimations of the true 
effects of the seeding program.  
For the Western Uintas prog ram, a 5% average increase would yield approximately ~0.8 inches of 
additional water over the target area. The target area comprises approximately 600 square miles. An 
average 0.8 inches of augmented water across the target would yield approximately ~25,00 0 additional 
acre-feet of runoff. Using an estimated average current cost of conducting the seeding program, the cost 
of producing the additional runoff via cloud seeding is approximately $3.50 per acre-foot. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
45 
 
REFERENCES 
Givati, A. and D. Rosenfeld, 2004: Quantifying Precipitation Suppression Due to Air Pollution. American 
Meteorological Society, Journal of Applied Meteorology, Vol. 43, pp. 1038-1056. 
 
Griffith, D. A., M. E. Solak and D.P. Yorty, 2003: Summary and Evaluation of 2002-2003 Winter Cloud 
Seeding Operations in the Western Uinta Mountains, Utah. NAWC Report No. WM 03-6, 
September, 2003. 
 
Griffith, D. A., M. E. Solak and D.P. Yorty, 2005: Is Air Pollution Impacting Winter Orographic 
Precipitation in Utah? Weather Modification Association, J. Wea. Modif., Vol. 37, pp. 14-20. 
 
Griffith, D.A., M.E. Solak and D.P. Yorty, 2009: 30+ Winter Seasons of Operational Cloud Seeding in Utah. 
J. Wea. Modif., Vol. 41, pp. 23-37. 
 
Solak, M.E., D. P. Yorty and D.A. Griffith, 2003: Estimations of Downwind Cloud Seeding Effects in Utah. 
Weather Modification Association, J. Wea. Modif, Vol. 35, pp. 52-58.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
46 
 
APPENDIX A SUSPENSION CRITERIA 
 
Certain situations require temporary or longer-term suspension of cloud seeding activities, with reference 
to well -considered criteria for consideration of possible suspensions, to minimize either an actual or 
apparent contribution of seeding to a potentially hazardous situation. The ability to forecast (anticipate) 
and judiciously avoid hazardous conditions is very important in limiting any potential liability associated 
with weather modification and to maintain a positive public image.  
There are three pr imary hazardous situations around which suspension criteria have been developed. 
These are:  
 1. Excess snowpack accumulation  
 2. Rain-induced winter flooding  
 3. Severe weather  
1.  Excess Snowpack Accumulation  
Snowpack begins to accumulate in the moun tainous areas of Utah in November and continues through 
April. The heaviest average accumulations normally occur from January through  March. Excessive 
snowpack water content becomes a potential hazard during the resultant snowmelt. The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) maintains a network of high elevation snowpack measurement 
sites in the State of Utah, known as the SNOTEL network. SNOTEL automated observations are now readily 
available, updated as often as hourly. The following set of criteria , based upon observations from these 
SNOTEL site observations, has been developed as a guide for potential suspension of operations. 
 
47 
 
 
 
  
Snowpack-related suspension considerations will be assessed on a geographical division or sub -division 
basis. The NRCS has divided the State of Utah into 13 such divisions as follows: Bear River, Weber-Ogden 
Rivers, Provo River -Utah Lake-Jordan River, Tooele Valley -Vernon Creek, Green River, Duchesne River, 
Price-San Rafael, Dirty Devil, South Eastern Utah, Sevier River, Beaver River, Escalante River, and Virgin 
River. The Weber -Ogden and Provo River – Utah Lake – Jordan River criteria apply to suspension 
considerations for the Western Uintas project. Since SNOTEL observations are available on a daily basis, 
suspensions (and cancellation of suspensions) can be made on a daily basis using linear interpolation of 
the first of month criteria. For the Western Uintas, four SNOTEL sites (Chalk Creek #1, Trial Lake, Smith 
and Morehouse, and Rock Creek) have date-specific snow water equivalent criteria on which suspension 
decisions can be based.  
Streamflow forecasts, reservoir storage levels, soil moisture content and amounts of precipitation in prior 
seasons are other factors which need to be considered when the potential for susp ending seeding 
operations due to excess snowpack water content exists.  
2. Rain-induced Winter Floods  
The potential for wintertime flooding from rainfall on low elevation snowpack is fairly high in some 
(especially the more southern) target areas during t he late winter/early spring period. Every precaution 
must be taken to insure accurate forecasting and timely suspension of operations during these potential 

 
48 
 
flood-producing situations. The objective of suspension under these conditions is to eliminate both  the 
real and/or perceived impact of weather modification when any increase in precipitation has the potential 
of creating a flood hazard. 
3. Severe Weather  
During periods of hazardous weather associated with both winter orographic and convective precipitation 
systems it is sometimes necessary or advisable for the National Weather Service (NWS) to issue special 
weather bulletins advising the public of the weather phenomena and the attendant hazards. Each 
phenomenon is described in terms of criteria used by the NWS in issuing special weather bulletins. Those 
that may be relevant in the conduct of winter cloud seeding programs include the following: 
• Winter Storm Warning - This is issued by the NWS when it expects heavy snow warning 
criteria to be met, along with strong winds/wind chill or freezing precipitation. 
• Flash Flood Warnings - This is issued by the NWS when flash flooding is imminent or in 
progress. In the Intermountain West, these warnings are generally issued relative to, but 
are not limited to, fall or spring convective systems. 
Seeding operations may be suspended whenever the NWS issues a weather warning for or adjacent to 
any target area. Since the objective of the cloud seeding program is to increase winter snowfall in the 
mountainous areas of the state, operations will typically not be suspended when Winter Storm Warnings 
are issued, unless there are special considerations (e.g., a heavy storm that impacts Christmas Eve travel).  
 
Flash Flood Warnings are usually issued when intense convective activity causing heavy rainfall is expected 
or is occurring. Although the probability of this situation occurring during our core operational seeding 
periods is low, the potential does exist, especially over southern sections of the state during late M arch 
and early April, which can include the project spring extension period. The type of storm that may cause 
problems is one that has the potential of producing 1 -2 inches (or greater) of rainfall in approximately a 
24-hour period, combined with high free zing levels (e.g., > 8,000 feet MSL). Seeding operations will be 
suspended for the duration of the warning period in the affected areas. 
NAWC’s project meteorologists have the authority to temporarily suspend localized seeding operations 
due to development of hazardous severe weather conditions even if the NWS has not issued a warning. 
This would be a rare event, but it is important for the operator to have this latitude. 
 
49 
 
APPENDIX B SEEDING OPERATIONS TABLES 
Table B-1 
Generator Hours – Western Uintas, 2022-2023 
Storms 1-11 (rounded to quarter hour) 
Storm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
Date Dec 12-
13 Dec 15 Dec 21 Dec 27-
28 Dec 31 Jan 6 Jan 10-
11 Jan 15 Jan 17-
18 
Jan 27-
28 
Feb 5 
SITE            
WU-2  9  10        
WU-3 20.75 9  10        
WU-4         17.25   
WU-5 29 11  22  11 14.75 8.5   7 
WU-6 27 9 9   9 18 8  20.75 5 
WU-7 27 9 9 22  3 18 8  20.75 7 
WU-8 28.5 9 9 20   18 8  20.75 6 
WU-9 38 9 10.5 11   18 8  20.75 7 
WU-10       19 8  19  
WU-11 27  8.5 22 6.75  15 7   6.5 
WU-12 27.5  8.5 22 6.75  18 7   6.75 
            Storm 
Total 
 
224.75 65 54.5 139 13.5 23 138.75 62.5 17.25 102 42.25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
Table B-2 
Generator Hours – Western Uintas, 2021-2022 
Storms 12-22 (rounded to quarter hour) 
Storm 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 
Date Feb 6 Feb 8 Feb 21 Feb 27-
28 Mar 4-5 Mar 5-6 Mar 8 Mar 12 Mar 15 Mar 20 Mar 22 
SITE            
WU-2 3.75 5          
WU-3 3.75 5          
WU-4 6.5 5          
WU-5   5 14 15 10  5 10   
WU-6  5 6.5 14  12      
WU-7  5 7 12   4 5    
WU-8  5 5 12 13  4 5    
WU-9   6.25 14 15 14 5 5 9 8  
WU-10    14 13 14 5 5  8  
WU-11   6.5 12  12 5  9 8 6 
WU-12   7 10.5  14 5  9 8 7.75 
            Storm 
Total 
 
13 30 43.25 102.5 56 76 18 25 37 32 15.75 
 
  
 
51 
 
APPENDIX C EVALUATION DATA 
 
Western Uintas December – March Precipitation, Linear Regression 
YEAR XOBS YOBS YCALC RATIO EXCESS 
Regression (non-seeded) period:    
1982 21.23 20.44 17.78 1.15 2.66 
1983 16.45 13.03 14.56 0.90 -1.53 
1984 20.43 13.81 17.24 0.80 -3.42 
1985 9.63 11.47 9.95 1.15 1.52 
1986 18.55 17.23 15.97 1.08 1.26 
1987 8.73 8.41 9.34 0.90 -0.93 
1988 10.88 10.77 10.79 1.00 -0.02 
1997 20.68 17.74 17.41 1.02 0.34 
1998 16.48 14.34 14.57 0.98 -0.23 
1999 14.28 12.64 13.09 0.97 -0.45 
2000 15.15 14.47 13.68 1.06 0.79 
      
Mean 15.68 14.03 14.04 1.00 0.00 
      
Seeded period:     
YEAR XOBS YOBS YCALC RATIO EXCESS 
1989 15.03 13.37 13.60 0.98 -0.23 
1990 9.85 11.59 10.10 1.15 1.48 
1991 10.00 11.46 10.20 1.12 1.25 
1992 5.15 6.01 6.93 0.87 -0.92 
1993 17.13 17.83 15.01 1.19 2.82 
1994* 9.15 10.71 9.63 1.11 1.08 
1995 12.45 14.71 11.86 1.24 2.86 
1996* 18.73 18.37 16.09 1.14 2.28 
2001 9.23 8.64 9.68 0.89 -1.04 
2002 13.45 10.37 12.53 0.83 -2.16 
2003 9.93 9.61 10.15 0.95 -0.54 
2004 14.58 10.36 13.29 0.78 -2.93 
2005 11.60 14.99 11.28 1.33 3.70 
2006** 21.43 16.99 17.91 0.95 -0.93 
2007** 12.23 9.29 11.71 0.79 -2.42 
2008** 16.93 16.54 14.88 1.11 1.67 
2009** 16.20 14.67 14.39 1.02 0.28 
2010** 12.13 9.41 11.64 0.81 -2.22 
2011** 17.43 17.91 15.21 1.18 2.70 
2012* 11.78 8.47 11.40 0.74 -2.93 
2013 13.35 9.03 12.46 0.72 -3.44 
2014 14.48 13.20 13.22 1.00 -0.02 
2015 11.08 7.99 10.93 0.73 -2.94 
2016 17.80 13.16 15.47 0.85 -2.31 
2017 21.30 23.00 17.83 1.29 5.17 
2018 11.63 8.80 11.30 0.78 -2.50 
2019 15.33 14.97 13.80 1.09 1.17 
2020 15.20 12.60 13.71 0.92 -1.11 
2021 11.73 9.77 11.37 0.86 -1.60 
2022 12.00 11.11 11.55 0.96 -0.44      
 
52 
 
2023 16.50 20.36 14.59 1.40 5.77 
      
Mean 13.75 12.78 12.38 1.03 0.40 
      
* No seeding in target areas    
** Seeding in Weber Basin but not in Provo R Basin, these are still included in the 
mean 
      
      
SUMMARY OUTPUT     
      
Regression Statistics     
Multiple R 0.877723     
R Square 0.770398     
Adjusted R 
Square 0.744887     
Standard Error 1.728461     
Observations 11     
  Coefficients 
Standard 
Error t Stat P-value 
Lower 
95% 
Intercept 3.456066 1.994168 1.733087 0.117116 -1.05506 
X Variable 1 0.674813 0.122798 5.495294 0.000383 0.397024 
 
 
Western Uintas April 1 Snowpack, Linear Regression 
YEAR XOBS YOBS YCALC RATIO EXCESS 
Non-seeded Years    
1970 16.14 16.21 18.32 0.89 -2.11 
1971 18.66 21.43 20.19 1.06 1.24 
1972 19.18 18.17 20.57 0.88 -2.40 
1973 16.02 16.61 18.23 0.91 -1.62 
1974 18.42 16.77 20.01 0.84 -3.24 
1975 20.08 19.97 21.24 0.94 -1.27 
1976 17.46 17.33 19.30 0.90 -1.97 
1977 6.24 8.97 10.98 0.82 -2.01 
1978 16.18 19.23 18.35 1.05 0.88 
1979 17.40 17.80 19.25 0.92 -1.45 
1980 19.86 25.26 21.08 1.20 4.18 
1981 8.38 12.66 12.57 1.01 0.09 
1982 21.08 23.50 21.98 1.07 1.52 
1983 18.42 20.90 20.01 1.04 0.89 
1984 24.80 22.01 24.74 0.89 -2.72 
1985 16.06 21.44 18.26 1.17 3.18 
1986 15.84 25.73 18.10 1.42 7.63 
1987 8.08 13.97 12.35 1.13 1.62 
1988 11.42 14.23 14.82 0.96 -0.59 
1997 19.72 22.41 20.97 1.07 1.44 
1998 14.30 16.39 16.96 0.97 -0.57 
1999 13.34 14.86 16.24 0.91 -1.39 
2000 13.90 15.41 16.66 0.93 -1.25 
      
 
53 
 
Mean 16.13 18.32 18.31 1.00 0.00 
      
Seeded Period     
YEAR XOBS YOBS YCALC RATIO EXCESS 
1989 17.22 18.04 19.12 0.94 -1.08 
1990 6.94 14.79 11.50 1.29 3.28 
1991 10.34 15.00 14.02 1.07 0.98 
1992 3.44 10.29 8.91 1.15 1.38 
1993 16.02 21.34 18.23 1.17 3.11 
1994* 8.42 13.31 12.60 1.06 0.72 
1995 11.96 18.43 15.22 1.21 3.21 
1996* 16.96 22.21 18.93 1.17 3.29 
2001 6.62 10.53 11.27 0.93 -0.74 
2002 14.86 14.21 17.37 0.82 -3.16 
2003 7.04 12.31 11.58 1.06 0.74 
2004*** 11.74 9.83 15.06 0.65 -5.23 
2005 14.26 21.09 16.93 1.25 4.16 
2006** 21.12 21.81 22.01 0.99 -0.20 
2007** 7.12 10.16 11.64 0.87 -1.48 
2008** 17.28 20.07 19.16 1.05 0.91 
2009** 14.06 17.17 16.78 1.02 0.39 
2010** 11.22 11.84 14.67 0.81 -2.83 
2011** 20.06 24.50 21.22 1.15 3.28 
2012* 9.22 8.86 13.19 0.67 -4.33 
2013 9.14 10.69 13.13 0.81 -2.45 
2014 11.16 16.61 14.63 1.14 1.98 
2015*** 4.66 6.40 9.81 0.65 -3.41 
2016 14.74 14.71 17.28 0.85 -2.57 
2017 16.68 23.23 18.72 1.24 4.51 
2018 7.40 10.29 11.84 0.87 -1.56 
2019 18.44 21.64 20.02 1.08 1.62 
2020 14.78 16.80 17.31 0.97 -0.51 
2021 11.54 12.30 14.91 0.82 -2.61 
2022 8.36 12.20 12.55 0.97 -0.35 
2023 22.90 27.00 23.33 1.16 3.67 
      
Mean 12.87 16.43 15.90 1.033 0.53 
      
      
* No seeding in target areas  
** Seeding in Weber Basin only, not in Provo R Basin but still included 
***  Excluded due to excessive snow melt   
      
SUMMARY OUTPUT     
      
Regression Statistics     
Multiple R 0.790698001     
R Square 0.625203329     
Adjusted R Square 0.607355868     
 
54 
 
Standard Error 2.604867978     
Observations 23     
      
      
  Coefficients Standard Error t Stat P-value Lower 95% 
Intercept 6.361749358 2.091542482 3.041654383 0.006201346 2.012147901 
X Variable 1 0.741148292 0.125222591 5.918646823 7.10871E-06 0.480733612 
 
 
 
Western Uintas April 1 Snowpack, Multiple Linear Regression 
YEAR 
Magic 
Mtn, ID 
Badger 
Gulch, 
ID 
Willow 
Flat, ID 
Big 
Bend, 
NV 
Strawb
erry 
Divide, 
UT YOBS YCALC RATIO 
EXC
ESS 
Non-Seeded Years        
1970 23.30 15.30 13.10 10.80 18.20 16.21 17.11 0.95 -0.89 
1971 24.80 14.10 20.40 12.70 21.30 21.43 18.69 1.15 2.74 
1972 33.40 20.40 13.20 10.90 18.00 18.17 17.76 1.02 0.41 
1973 21.60 14.40 15.40 8.90 19.80 16.61 18.45 0.90 -1.83 
1974 25.20 20.00 17.00 11.90 18.00 16.77 18.95 0.88 -2.18 
1975 24.40 18.70 20.40 15.70 21.20 19.97 20.06 1.00 -0.09 
1976 22.00 15.50 21.20 12.70 15.90 17.33 16.71 1.04 0.62 
1977 8.40 6.00 6.00 3.10 7.70 8.97 9.84 0.91 -0.87 
1978 19.20 12.40 15.20 9.20 24.90 19.23 20.71 0.93 -1.48 
1979 19.60 14.60 19.40 10.10 23.30 17.80 21.02 0.85 -3.22 
1980 21.50 15.70 20.40 13.70 28.00 25.26 23.35 1.08 1.91 
1981 12.00 7.20 6.60 2.00 14.10 12.66 13.70 0.92 -1.04 
1982 28.10 18.20 19.30 13.70 26.10 23.50 22.32 1.05 1.18 
1983 24.60 14.60 12.90 15.70 24.30 20.90 19.19 1.09 1.71 
1984 32.00 19.50 25.10 18.00 29.40 22.01 24.14 0.91 -2.12 
1985 20.80 14.70 15.40 9.10 20.30 21.44 18.92 1.13 2.52 
1986 19.10 16.10 16.60 4.40 23.00 25.73 22.17 1.16 3.56 
1987 10.60 8.80 6.90 2.30 11.80 13.97 13.24 1.06 0.73 
1988 16.10 9.00 10.80 6.80 14.40 14.23 13.75 1.04 0.48 
1997 26.90 18.60 17.40 8.40 27.30 22.41 23.99 0.93 -1.58 
1998 18.20 11.50 16.00 7.20 18.60 16.39 17.39 0.94 -1.01 
1999 20.00 13.80 13.40 8.00 11.50 14.86 13.69 1.08 1.16 
2000 18.50 11.90 13.10 8.80 17.20 15.41 16.12 0.96 -0.71 
          
Mean 21.32 14.39 15.44 9.74 19.75 18.32 18.32 1.00 0.00 
          
Seeded Period         
 
55 
 
YEAR 
Magic 
Mtn, ID 
Badger 
Gulch, 
ID 
Willow 
Flat, ID 
Big 
Bend, 
NV 
Strawb
erry 
Divide, 
UT YOBS YCALC RATIO 
EXC
ESS 
1989 23.60 16.20 18.00 10.50 17.80 18.04 17.84 1.01 0.20 
1990 10.20 7.70 4.00 0.00 12.80 14.79 13.45 1.10 1.34 
1991 14.70 7.50 11.20 2.40 15.90 15.00 14.95 1.00 0.05 
1992 3.60 3.00 3.70 0.00 6.90 10.29 9.05 1.14 1.24 
1993 18.10 14.60 17.70 8.40 21.30 21.34 20.18 1.06 1.16 
1994* 11.60 8.40 11.60 0.40 10.10 13.31 12.88 1.03 0.44 
1995 15.70 10.40 12.90 3.90 16.90 18.43 16.52 1.12 1.91 
1996* 21.20 14.70 16.30 10.20 22.40 22.21 19.96 1.11 2.25 
2001 11.40 6.10 5.10 2.00 8.50 10.53 10.02 1.05 0.51 
2002 20.90 15.80 14.30 10.40 12.90 14.21 14.88 0.96 -0.66 
2003 10.60 4.20 8.10 2.00 10.30 12.31 10.71 1.15 1.61 
2004*** 20.20 13.00 11.40 3.60 10.50 9.83 13.30 0.74 -3.47 
2005 16.70 9.80 14.90 7.70 22.20 21.09 18.68 1.13 2.40 
2006** 28.20 18.20 21.00 14.50 23.70 21.81 21.03 1.04 0.78 
2007** 14.00 5.20 6.00 1.80 8.60 10.16 9.51 1.07 0.65 
2008** 20.00 16.80 19.00 11.60 19.00 20.07 19.16 1.05 0.91 
2009** 20.40 10.20 15.50 10.10 14.10 17.17 13.50 1.27 3.67 
2010** 15.70 11.20 10.80 8.40 10.00 11.84 11.97 0.99 -0.13 
2011** 21.80 15.40 24.60 13.80 24.70 24.50 21.82 1.12 2.68 
2012* 17.20 10.90 9.30 2.80 5.90 8.86 10.14 0.87 -1.29 
2013 15.20 9.60 9.40 2.00 9.50 10.69 12.03 0.89 -1.34 
2014 17.70 11.40 10.20 2.20 14.30 16.61 15.18 1.09 1.43 
2015*** 13.00 5.40 0.00 0.00 4.90 6.40 7.25 0.88 -0.85 
2016 22.40 14.70 14.80 9.50 12.30 14.71 14.11 1.04 0.61 
2017 19.80 15.10 15.20 10.10 23.20 23.23 20.64 1.13 2.59 
2018 12.70 6.90 7.10 2.70 7.60 10.29 9.79 1.05 0.49 
2019 21.20 17.70 19.00 10.40 23.90 21.64 22.32 0.97 -0.67 
2020 21.40 15.60 13.00 8.40 15.50 16.80 16.37 1.03 0.43 
2021 16.60 12.40 12.00 6.70 10.00 12.30 12.78 0.96 -0.48 
2022 14.90 7.00 7.00 2.00 10.90 12.20 11.50 1.06 0.70 
2023 28.40 20.60 27.20 14.70 23.60 27.00 22.64 1.19 4.36 
          
Mean 17.53 11.67 13.14 6.78 15.25 16.43 15.41 1.066 1.02 
          
          
* No seeding in target areas  
** Seeding in Weber Basin only, not in Provo R Basin but still 
included     
***  Excluded due to excessive snow melt       
          
SUMMARY OUTPUT         
          
Regression Statistics         
Multiple R 
0.9047
5791         
 
56 
 
R Square 
0.8185
86875         
Adjusted R 
Square 
0.7652
30074         
Standard 
Error 
2.0142
22267         
Observatio
ns 23         
          
          
  
Coeffici
ents 
Standar
d Error t Stat P-value 
Lower 
95% 
Upper 
95% 
Lower 
95.0% 
Upper 
95.0%  
Intercept 
3.9957
42621 
1.84902
9881 
2.1609
94077 
0.0452
57773 
0.0946
25126 
7.8968
60115 
0.0946
25126 
7.8968
60115  
Magic Mtn 
-
0.1306
4576 
0.21561
0564 
-
0.6059
3394 
0.5525
63859 
-
0.5855
4492 
0.3242
53403 
-
0.5855
4492 
0.3242
53403  
Badger 
Gulch 
0.4109
87093 
0.30428
3703 
1.3506
70735 
0.1945
07174 
-
0.2309
963 
1.0529
70487 
-
0.2309
963 
1.0529
70487  
Willow Flat 
0.1183
62921 
0.18066
398 
0.6551
55063 
0.5211
35389 
-
0.2628
0529 
0.4995
31132 
-
0.2628
0529 
0.4995
31132  
Big Bend 
-
0.1709
8141 
0.20373
4461 
-
0.8392
3655 
0.4129
83076 
-
0.6008
2415 
0.2588
61333 
-
0.6008
2415 
0.2588
61333  
Strawberry 
0.5583
59365 
0.11949
8786 
4.6725
10759 
0.0002
18598 
0.3062
38612 
0.8104
80118 
0.3062
38612 
0.8104
80118  
 
57 
 
APPENDIX D GLOSSARY 
Advection: Movement of an air mass. Cold advection describes a colder air mass moving into the area, 
and warm advection is used to describe an incoming warmer air mass. Dry and moist advection can be 
used similarly. 
 
Air Mass: A term used to describe a region of the atmosphere with certain defining characteristics. For 
example, a cold or warm air mass, or a wet or dry air mass. It is a fairly subjective term but is usually 
used in reference to large (synoptic scale) regions of the atmosphere, both near the surface and/or at 
mid and upper levels of the atmosphere. 
 
Cold-core low: A typical mid-latitude type of low pressure system, where the core of the system is 
colder than its surroundings. This type of system is also defined by the cyclonic circulation being 
strongest in the upper levels of the atmosphere. The opposite is a warm-core low, which typically occurs 
in the tropics. 
 
Cold Pool: An air mass that is cold relative to its surroundings, and may be confined to a particular basin 
 
Condensation: Phase change of water vapor into liquid form. This can occur on the surface of objects 
(such as dew on the grass) or in mid-air (leading to the formation of clouds). Clouds are technically 
composed of water in liquid form, not water vapor.  
 
Confluent: Wind vectors coming closer together in a two-dimensional frame of reference (opposite of 
diffluent). The term convergence is also used similarly. 
 
Convective (or convection): Pertains to the development of precipitation areas due to the rising of 
warmer, moist air through the surrounding air mass. The warmth and moisture contained in a given air 
mass makes it lighter than colder, dryer air. Convection often leads to small-scale, locally heavy showers 
or thundershowers. The opposite precipitation type is known as stratiform precipitation. 
 
Convergence: Refers to the converging of wind vectors at a given level of the atmosphere. Low-level 
convergence (along with upper-level divergence), for instance, is associated with lifting of the air mass 
which usually leads to development of clouds and precipitation. Low-level divergence (and upper-level 
convergence) is associated with atmospheric subsidence, which leads to drying and warming. 
 
Deposition: A phase change where water vapor turns directly to solid form (ice). The opposite process is 
called sublimation. 
 
Dew point: The temperature at which condensation occurs (or would occur) with a given amount of 
moisture in the air. 
 
Diffluent: Wind vectors spreading further apart in a two-dimensional frame of reference; opposite of 
confluent 
 
Entrain: Usually used in reference to the process of a given air mass being ingested into a storm system 
 
 
58 
 
Evaporation: Phase change of liquid water into water vapor. Water vapor is usually invisible to the eye. 
 
El Nino: A reference to a particular phase of oceanic and atmospheric temperature and circulation 
patterns in the tropical Pacific, where the prevailing easterly trade winds weaken or dissipate. Often has 
an effect on mid-latitude patterns as well, such as increased precipitation in southern portions of the 
U.S. and decreased precipitation further north. The opposite phase is called La Nina. 
 
Front (or frontal zone): Reference to a temperature boundary with either incoming colder air (cold 
front) or incoming warmer air (warm front); can sometimes be a reference to a stationary temperature 
boundary line (stationary front) or a more complex type known as an occluded front (where the 
temperature change across a boundary can vary in type at different elevations).  
 
Glaciogenic: Ice-forming (aiding the process of nucleation); usually used in reference to cloud seeding 
nuclei 
 
GMT (or UTC, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at 
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7 
hours. 
 
Graupel: A precipitation type that can be described as “soft hail”, that develops due to riming 
(nucleation around a central core). It is composed of opaque (white) ice, not clear hard ice such as that 
contained in hailstones. It usually indicated the presence of convective clouds and can be associated 
with electrical charge separation and occasionally lightning activity. 
 
High Pressure (or Ridge): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable weather. 
Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic 
(clockwise) circulation pattern. 
 
Inversion: Refers to a layer of the atmosphere in which the temperature increase with elevation 
 
Jet Stream or Upper-Level Jet (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of 
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track 
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-
latitude synoptic-scale storm development. 
 
La Nina: The opposite phase of that known as El Nino in the tropical Pacific. During La Nina the easterly 
tropical trade winds strengthen and can lead in turn to a strong mid-latitude storm track, which often 
brings wetter weather to northern portions of the U.S.  
 
Longwave (or longwave pattern): The longer wavelengths, typically on the order of 1,000 – 2,000+ miles 
of the typical ridge/trough pattern around the northern (or southern) Hemisphere, typically most 
pronounced in the mid-latitudes. 
 
Low-Level Jet: A zone of maximum wind speed in the lower atmosphere. Can be caused by geographical 
features or various weather patterns, and can influence storm behavior and dispersion of cloud seeding 
materials 
 
59 
 
 
Low-pressure (or trough): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather. 
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic (counter-
clockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere. 
 
Mesoscale: Sub - synoptic scale, about 100 miles or less; this is the size scale of more localized weather 
features (such as thunderstorms or mountain-induced weather processes). 
 
Microphysics: Used in reference to composition and particle types in a cloud 
 
MSL (Mean Sea Level): Elevation height reference in comparison to sea level 
 
Negative (ly) tilted trough: A low-pressure trough where a portion is undercut, such that a frontal zone 
can be in a northwest to southeast orientation. 
 
Nucleation: The process of supercooled water droplets in a cloud turning to ice. This is the process that 
is aided by cloud seeding. For purposes of cloud seeding, there are three possible types of cloud 
composition: Liquid (temperature above the freezing point), supercooled (below freezing but still in 
liquid form), and ice crystals.  
 
Nuclei: Small particles that aid water droplet or ice particle formation in a cloud  
 
Orographic: Terrain-induced weather processes, such as cloud or precipitation development on the 
upwind side of a mountain range. Orographic lift refers to the lifting of an air mass as it encounters a 
mountain range. 
 
Pressure Heights:  
(700 millibars, or mb): Corresponds to approximately 10,000 feet above sea level (MSL); 850 mb 
corresponds to about 5,000 feet MSL; and 500 mb corresponds to about 18,000 feet MSL. These are 
standard height levels that are occasionally referenced, with the 700-mb level most important regarding 
cloud-seeding potential in most of the western U.S. 
 
Positive (ly) tilted trough: A normal U-shaped trough configuration, where an incoming cold front would 
generally be in a northeast– southwest orientation. 
 
Reflectivity: The density of returned signal from a radar beam, which is typically bounced back due to 
interaction with precipitation particles (either frozen or liquid) in the atmosphere. The reflectivity 
depends on the size, number, and type of particles that the radar beam encounters 
 
Ridge (or High Pressure System): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable 
weather. Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic 
(clockwise) circulation pattern. 
 
Ridge axis: The longitude band corresponding to the high point of a ridge 
 
 
60 
 
Rime (or rime ice): Ice buildup on an object (often on an existing precipitation particle) due to the 
freezing of supercooled water droplets. 
 
Shortwave (or shortwave pattern): Smaller-scale wave features of the weather pattern typically seen at 
mid-latitudes, usually on the order of a few to several hundred miles; these often correspond to 
individual frontal systems 
 
Silver iodide: A compound commonly used in cloud seeding because of the similarity of its molecular 
structure to that of an ice crystal. This structure helps in the process of nucleation, where supercooled 
cloud water changes to ice crystal form. 
 
Storm Track (sometimes reference as the Jet Stream): A zone of maximum storm propagation and 
development, usually concentrated in the mid-latitudes. 
 
Stratiform: Usually used in reference to precipitation, this implies a large area of precipitation that has a 
fairly uniform intensity except where influenced by terrain, etc. It is the result of larger-scale (synoptic 
scale) weather processes, as opposed to convective processes. 
 
Sublimation: The phase change in which water in solid form (ice) turns directly into water vapor. The 
opposite process is deposition. 
 
Subsidence: The process of a given air mass moving downward in elevation, such as often occurs on the 
downwind side of a mountain range 
 
Supercooled: Liquid water (such as tiny cloud droplets) occurring at temperatures below the freezing 
point (32 F or 0 C). 
 
Synoptic Scale: A scale of hundreds to perhaps 1,000+ miles, the size scale at which high and low 
pressure systems develop 
 
Trough (or low pressure system): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather. 
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic (counter-
clockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere. 
 
Trough axis: The longitude band corresponding to the low point of a trough 
 
Upper-Level Jet or Jet Stream (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of 
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track 
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-
latitude synoptic-scale storm development. 
 
 
UTC (or GMT, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at 
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7 
hours. 
 
 
61 
 
Vector: Term used to represent wind velocity (speed + direction) at a given point 
 
Velocity: Describes speed of an object, often used in the description of wind intensities 
 
Vertical Wind Profiler: Ground-based system that measures wind velocity at various levels above the 
site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 