 
Annual Cloud Seeding Report 
Northern Utah Aerial Program 
2023-2024 Winter Season 
 
Prepared For: 
State of Utah, Division of Water Resources 
 
Prepared By: 
Todd Flanagan 
 
 
 
North American Weather Consultants, Inc. 
8180 S. Highland Dr., Suite B-2 
Sandy, Utah 84093 
 
 
 
 
June 2024 
 
 

 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................... i 
THE SCIENCE BEHIND CLOUD SEEDING ......................................................................................................... ii 
STATE OF THE CLIMATE................................................................................................................................ iii 
1.0 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................ 1 
2.0 PROJECT DESIGN .............................................................................................................................. 2 
2.1 Project Design Considerations .......................................................................................... 3 
2.2 Northern Utah Aerial Seeding Project Design ................................................................... 4 
3.0   EQUIPMENT, PROCEDURES AND PERSONNEL ................................................................................. 6 
3.1 Weather Radar .................................................................................................................. 6 
3.2 Seeding Aircraft and Tracking Systems ............................................................................. 6 
3.3 Operations Center ........................................................................................................... 10 
3.4 Weather Forecasts and Meteorological Data Acquisition .............................................. 10 
3.5 Suspension Criteria ......................................................................................................... 10 
3.6 Personnel ........................................................................................................................ 10 
4.0 WEATHER DATA AND MODELS USED IN SEEDING OPERATIONS ................................................... 11 
5.0 OPERATIONS .................................................................................................................................. 19 
5.1 Operational Procedures .................................................................................................. 19 
5.2 Storm Events of the 2023-2024 Winter Season .............................................................. 20 
November 2023 ............................................................................................................... 21 
December 2023 ............................................................................................................... 28 
January 2024 ................................................................................................................... 30 
February 2024 ................................................................................................................. 40 
March 2024 ..................................................................................................................... 45 
April 2024 ........................................................................................................................ 57 
6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 60 
Appendix A    SUSPENSION CRITERIA .......................................................................................................... 62 
Appendix B    GLOSSARY OF METEOROLOGICAL TERMS ............................................................................ 67 
 
i 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Northern Utah Aerial Program (NUAP) had its inaugural season during the winter of 2023-24, 
beginning in early November 2023, and continuing through April 15, 2024. A Cessna Chancellor C414 twin-
engine plane was dedicated to the program, equipped with both wing -fixed Burn-In-Place (BIP) flares 
along with a belly rack for which ejectable flares could also be used. The plane was based at the Logan -
Cache Airport in northern Utah and was responsi ble for aerial -based cloud seeding to complement the 
various ground-based seeding programs in northern Utah. 
The 2023-24 season was active, with twenty -nine (29) storm events occurring in northern Utah 
during the five-month season. Of these, fourteen (14) flights occurred over ten storm events during the 
winter. Storms were distributed relatively evenly across th e season, with one significant “dry period” 
during December. A total of 127 silver iodide (AgI) BIP flares were used for seeding, totaling 2540 g of AgI; 
additionally, 65 AgI ejectable flares were used for seeding, totaling 195g of AgI. Many storm events during 
the season contained one or more severe hazards (severe turbulence, moderate to severe icing, lightning) 
that prompted “no-fly” or “temporary no-fly” decisions, which hindered seeding operations. In contrast 
to the Southern Utah Aerial Program, there were no pre-established flight tracks for the NUAP program, 
but instead they were developed on a storm-by-storm basis taking various atmospheric parameters into 
account (e.g., wind flow, moisture availability). 
As this was the first year of aerial seeding operations, no statistical or numerical analysis was 
completed due to lack of data; it is believed that after several years of aerial seeding are completed, initial 
statistical analysis relating to a target/cont rol comparison and/or streamflow analysis could be 
undertaken and evaluated to ascertain the prospect of the pilot program becoming operational. Analysis 
is also complicated by the fact that most of these areas are already included in ground -based seeding 
programs.  
With the conclusion of the season, a look back at all aspects of the program and how well they 
did or did not work will take place. Recommendations for the program going forward are presented at the 
end of the report. 
 
 
 
  
ii 
 
WEATHER MODIFICATION 
The Science Behind Cloud Seeding 
The Science 
The cloud -seeding process aids precipitation formation by 
enhancing ice crystal production in clouds. When the ice 
crystals grow sufficiently, they become snowflakes and fall to 
the ground.  
Silver iodide has been selected for its environmental safety and 
superior efficiency in producing ice in clouds. Silver iodide adds 
microscopic particles with a structural similarity to natural ice 
crystals. Ground-based and aircraft-borne technologies can be 
used to add the particles to the clouds. 
Safety 
Research has clearly documented that cloud seeding with 
silver-iodide aerosols shows no environmentally harmful effect. 
Iodine is a component of many necessary amino acids. Silver is 
both quite inert and naturally occurring, the amounts released 
are far less than background silver already present in unseeded 
areas. 
Effectiveness 
Numerous studies performed by universities, professional 
research organizations, private utility companies and weather 
modification providers have conclusively demonstrated the 
ability for Silver Iodide to augment precipitation under the 
proper atmospheric conditions.  
 
 
 
 
  
iii 
 
STATE OF THE CLIMATE 
Every ten years, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA) releases a summary 
of various U.S. weather conditions for the past three decades to determines average values for a variety 
of conditions, including, temperature and precipitation.  This is known as the U.S Climate normal, with a 
30-year average, representing the “new normal” for our climate.  These 30 -year normal values can help 
to determine a departure from historic norms and identify current weather trends.   
The current 30-year average ranges from 1990 – 2020.  Images in Figures 1 and 2 show how each 
30-year average for the past 120 years compares to the composite 20th century average for temperature 
and precipitation.  For the western U.S., the 1990 -2020 average show much warmer than average 
temperatures, in comparison to the 100-year 20th century average.  When comparing precipitation for the 
past 30 years to both the previous 30-year average and the 1901-2000 average, the American Southwest 
(including portions of Utah,  Arizona, California and Nevada) has seen as much as a 10% decrease in 
average annual precipitation. Figure 3 shows the m ean annual precipitation for the state of Utah based 
on 30-year period from 1991-2020. 
 
 
Figure 1. U.S. Annual Temperature compared to 20th-Century Average 
 

iv 
 
 
Figure 2. U.S. Annual Precipitation compared to 20th-Century Average 
 
Figure 3.  Mean annual precipitation for the state of Utah based on 30-year period from 1991-2020.

1 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud seeding in Utah has a long history, having been conducted in the state since the 1950s. 
North American Weather Consultants (NAWC) has been running programs to augment snowpack in Utah 
since the 1970s, primarily through the use of ground generators that disperse silver iodide particles and, 
utilizing upslope flow along the foothills and higher elevations, are carried into clouds that will ultimately 
produce ice crystals and snow. This method has worked reasonably well, with estimations of a 5 -15% 
increase in snowpack and precipitation for the various programs in the state. 
In 2022 NAWC entered discussions with the State of Utah’s Division of Water Resources (Utah 
DWR) regarding the potential for aerial cloud seeding to be conducted in the state to complement the 
ground-based seeding efforts. NAWC has conducted aerial programs outside of Utah, in Idaho with the 
goal of increasing snowpack and snowfall, and in California to promot e additional snowfall in the Sierra 
Nevada range as well as to promote additional rainfall for some coastal regions, primarily in Santa Barbara 
County. In developing a plan for aerial seeding in Utah, several locations were looked at and their 
prevailing winter weather conditions were taken into consideration. From this, it was determined that a 
base in the southern part of the state, which is climatolo gically warmer than other parts of Utah, would 
be favorable. St. George was viewed as a good candidate for basing aircraft as snow and ice in this area is 
uncommon, a decent-sized airport exists there, and it would provide relatively quick access to the target 
areas already in place for ground-based seeding operations.  
After the inaugural season of the Southern Utah Aerial Program, discussions ensued once again 
with Utah DWR regarding an expansion of the aerial seeding effort, and from this a second program was 
developed mimicking most of the design of the Southern Utah Aerial Program, with efforts to be focused 
across several of the northern Utah mountain ranges where ground -based seeding programs are also in 
place. Flight tracks were suggested, although given some differences between northern and southern 
Utah, it was determined that flight tracks would not be fixed but rather determined with each storm event 
that could be successfully and safely seeded. 
Through an agreement with Utah DWR wherein cost sharing was enabled, a pilot program was 
proposed. The 2023-2024 winter season was the first year of this program, beginning in early November 
2023, and continuing through April 15, 2024. The pilot and aircra ft were based in Logan. This report will 
discuss the design, implementation and operation of the Northern Utah Aerial Program (NUAP) for the 
2023-2024 season.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
2.0 PROJECT DESIGN 
The Northern Utah Aerial Program is conducted to affect various mountain ranges in northern 
Utah, among them the Wasatch, Bear River Range and Uintas. The target area along with sample flight 
tracks is depicted in Figure 2.1. It is important to note that, unlike the Southern Utah Aerial Program, there 
are no set standard tracks for the Northern Utah Aerial Program, but instead tracks are determined on a 
storm-by-storm basis. Airborne seeding capabilities were used, with the aircraft operated from the Logan-
Cache Airport (LGU) in Logan. The program objective was to seed all suitable storm systems affecting the 
target area during the period of November 15, 2023, through April 15, 2024, except if precluded on a 
storm-by-storm basis by established suspension criteria. This section provides an overview of the project 
design; more information regarding the various project components is provided in Section 3 of this report. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1. Northern Utah Aerial Program target areas, with potential/sample aerial seeding tracks in red . 

3 
 
2.1  Project Design Considerations 
Both research and operational programs in weather modification have been conducted in the 
United States and a number of other countries dating back to the 1950's. This field has experienced its 
fair share of controversy. The scientific community is still s omewhat divided regarding the efficacy of 
precipitation augmentation because precise quantification of the effects (at least at strict laboratory 
experimentation levels) is difficult, given that the typical effects are relatively small compared to the 
natural variability of precipitation. The types of precipitation augmentation programs that find the 
greatest acceptance are winter orographic (mountainous) programs. NAWC has and continues to operate 
several of these programs, with a long history of cloud see ding for precipitation augmentation and 
evaluations of seeding effectiveness.  
Several professional societies have adopted capability or position statements regarding weather 
modification programs. The principal societies or associations that have existing weather modification 
statements include: 
• The Weather Modification Association (WMA) 
• The American Meteorological Society (AMS) 
• The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
• The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) 
 
From the organizational statements, the following key points regarding the status of winter 
orographic seeding emerge: 
• Of the primary categories of cloud seeding for precipitation increase, seeding of winter 
orographic storm systems seems to offer the best prospects for increasing precipitation in 
an economically viable manner. 
• Strong (albeit largely non -randomized) statistical evidence exists for (winter) seasonal 
increases of the order of 5% to 15%. 
• A growing body of evidence from focused physical studies is confirming some key steps in 
the weather modification process, in support of the statistical evidence. 
• Additional research is recommended/encouraged. It is recognized that additional applied 
research can shed much valuable light on the physical processes involved, leading to 
improved opportunity recognition and intervention, resulting in more optimum 
augmentation operations, especially given technological advancements in observational 
systems and computer modeling. 
• Accurately quantifying the effects of cloud seeding programs remains a challenge. 
 
 NAWC’s philosophy is that the design of our operational programs should be based upon prior 
research programs that provided positive indications of increases in precipitation, to the extent that the 
research results are considered to be representative of the operational programs’ conditions. We have 
done so for the Northern Utah Aerial Program. Knowledge gained from other research programs in the 
West regarding the structure of winter storms and characteristics that are amenable to precipitation 
4 
 
enhancement via cloud seeding, has been incorporated into the Northern Utah Aerial Program design. 
NAWC’s extensive previous experience with other seeding project design and operations has also been 
brought into play. 
2.2 Northern Utah Aerial Seeding Project Design 
 We believe that the best project design for a winter cloud seeding program for the Northern 
Utah Mountains to be one that incorporates, as much as possible, the core elements of the knowledge 
gained in earlier research in the mountainous west, plus insight s from previous successful operational 
programs. The combination of ground -based (separate program) and airborne seeding modes should 
constitute the optimized method for capitalizing on the seeding potential for the area. NAWC operations 
focus on “selecti ve seeding,” i.e., they are focused on the specific storm periods that exhibit the 
characteristics that present the best potential for precipitation augmentation via cloud seeding. This 
approach provides the potential for the greatest precipitation augment ation effect at the most 
reasonable cost, thus constituting an excellent value to the project sponsors. Airborne seeding provides 
the ability to seed in some situations not favorable for ground -based releases, with guidelines shown 
below.  
 
Winter Aerial Seeding Criteria 
 
• Storm precipitation of ≥ 0.25 inches (SWE) is anticipated in the Northern Utah Mountains. 
• Cloud bases should be below the mountain barrier summit heights of 9-11 kft. 
• In stratiform cloud conditions, the -5°C level ideally should be below, but no more than 1 -2 
kft higher than, the mean barrier height of ~ 9-11 kft.  
• Ideally, the cloud top temperature (CTT) of the stratiform clouds producing precipitation 
should not be significantly colder than -15°C. Higher layered clouds not involved in the 
precipitation process can be colder. As a rule of thumb, a distance ≥ 2000 feet between cloud 
layers should provide adequate separation in that determination. 
• The aircraft can be flown at ~ -5°C, so that nucleation can be prompt. Flights can be conducted 
at colder temperatures to maintain safe altitudes and FAA minimum allowable altitudes if the 
-5°C level is exceedingly low. If heavy airframe icing is experienced, the flight altitude can be 
lowered to warmer temperatures, but with careful consideration of the underlying terrain 
and only with ATC approval. 
• Use the estimated winds in the layer from the seeding level to the -25°C level as guidance 
regarding which track or portion of track to use. In stable/stratiform conditions, the goal is to 
seed about 45 -60 minutes upwind of the mountain target areas. In mo re convective -like 
situations, the goal is to seed about 40 minutes upwind of the mountains. 
 
The project design, used by NAWC, has aircraft seeding of storms as they approach the Northern 
Utah mountains, with aircraft flights at the 0°C to -5°C temperature level in-cloud, allowing the seeding 
material to activate at the warmest possible temperatures and mix and disperse in -cloud. Aerial seeding 
5 
 
targets the pool of supercooled liquid water (SLW) that develops in-cloud during stormy periods over the 
windward slopes of mountain barriers. The SLW is the critical constituent that is converted (by the seeding 
material) to ice particles that can take on additional moisture and grow to sufficiently large sizes for fallout 
into the various watersheds. The responsibility of the project meteorologist is to identify the seeding 
opportunities and then to place the seeding material into the proper cloud regions to achieve the desired 
augmentation of the precipitation process, all within a variety of evolving temperature, moisture and wind 
situations during winter storms. This seeding decision -making is dynamic, since cloud, wind, and 
temperature conditions continually change during the passage of a winter storm over the target area. 
The core operational project period will be early to mid-November through mid-April, with the 
possibility of extension periods at either end of the core period as may be appropriate due to water supply 
conditions.  
  
6 
 
3.0 EQUIPMENT, PROCEDURES AND PERSONNEL 
Seeding operations during the 2023 -24 winter season were conducted using a seeding aircraft 
during the period from early November 2023 through April 15, 2024. The following sections describe the 
equipment, procedures and personnel used in the operation of the cloud seeding project. 
  3.1 Weather Radar 
NAWC utilized the National Weather Service (NWS) NEXRAD radar sites at Salt Lake City (KMTX), 
Pocatello, ID (KSFX) and Grand Junction, CO (KGJX) for the operation of the aerial cloud seeding program 
as all provide good coverage of the target area. The rada rs provide valuable information regarding the 
structure, intensity, movement, and evolution of precipitating cloud systems in addition to wind speed 
and direction within the precipitating echoes. The radar’s dual-polarization capabilities allow the radar to 
measure targets using both horizontal and vertical waves, providing additional information about 
hydrometeors and non-weather targets. Real-time radar data are key in operational decision-making for 
seeding modes and tracks (to help optimize the seeding releases). The NWS is responsible for all the 
necessary support for the radar:  operation, calibration, spare parts, and maintenance. 
3.2 Seeding Aircraft and Tracking Systems  
 NAWC provided a dedicated Cessna Chancellor C414 twin-engine plane as the seeding aircraft for 
the project. The aircraft was equipped with wing -mounted flare racks to hold burn -in-place flares, and 
also a belly rack which holds ejectable flares. The plane was housed in a hangar at the Logan-Cache Airport 
(LGU) at Logan in far northern Utah. Figure 3.1 shows the seeding aircraft used for the program.  
7 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1. NAWC Cessna Chancellor C414 cloud seeding aircraft that was stationed at Logan-Cache Airport 
in northern Utah. 
 
For the 2023-24 season, NAWC obtained real-time flight track information from FlightAware, an 
internet-based aircraft -tracking website for IFR flights; in earlier years, FlightAware had significant 
problems with occasional long delays in providing information.  Over the past couple of years, FlightAware 
has made substantial improvements to its web service, with position updates occurring every 10 -30 
seconds.  FlightAware also shows a vertical cross -section of the flight path , allowing for a view of the 
altitude changes during the flight, which are important in times where the plane had to descend to shed 
ice in times of heavy icing. An example of this type of image is shown in Figure 3.2. During operations, 
radar and aircraft location data were acquired and archived. The radar-aircraft position-display systems 
provided useful and reliable information for the conduct of seeding operations. A ForeFlight Sentry Plus 
ADS-B Receiver was purchased at the start of the season to provide crucial information for the pilot – via 
an iPad – including current and live weather data such as radar, winds aloft, icing, turbulence and other 
data transmitted by the NWS and FAA along with GPS and flight data recorder.  

8 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2. Cumulative flight track from FlightAware.com from a seeding flight over northeastern Utah on 
March 30, 2024. Bottom quarter of image shows altitude (green line) and speed (yellow line) 
during the flight. 
 
NAWC established set flight tracks for use on the Southern Utah Aerial Program, but with the 
design for the Northern Utah Aerial Program, a different approach was taken as there are more 
restrictions in place across northern Utah given the high concentrati on of the population along the 
Wasatch Front along with some military airspace restrictions. Suggested flight tracks were developed from 
looking at past storm events wherein different flow regimes would dictate the location of possible flights; 
these are shown in Figure 3.3. However, unlike with the design of the Southern Utah Aerial Program, the 
flight tracks were left as an “open -ended” entity and would be determined on a storm -by-storm basis, 
with modifications to the suggested tracks allowed as long as safety was not compromised. 
 

9 
 
 
  
Figure 3.3. Sample/suggested seeding flight tracks for the Northern Utah Aerial Program. Purple areas 
indicate the intended target area, covering portions of the Wasatch, Bear River and Uintas 
mountain ranges. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
3.3 Operations Center 
The project meteorologist, working remotely from their residence in St. George utilized a personal 
computer and internet access to conduct all facets of program operation. Operational support was 
available from the main office in Sandy. Text messaging and phone calls were the main form of 
communication between pilot and meteorologist, although unlike with the Southern Utah Aerial Program, 
texting did not work during flights for the NUAP. 
3.4 Weather Forecasts and Meteorological Data Acquisition 
 Weather forecasting and direction of cloud seeding operations were conducted by the project 
meteorologist. Project forecast information was communicated to the pilot and other project staff via 
telephone or e-mail and updated as necessary. Relevant meteorological data/images were captured and 
archived as needed, for documentation of storm episodes. 
3.5 Suspension Criteria 
 Cloud seeding suspension criteria were implemented by NAWC to serve as safeguards to protect 
against claims of negligence, and the loss of property and/or life due to the cloud seeding program. 
Snowpack, streamflow and reservoir conditions are assessed as part of the suspension considerations. 
Statements issued by the National Weather Service (NWS) can also play an important role in the 
suspension criteria. NWS public safety notices are issued in the form of advisories or watches, neither of 
which necessarily restricts program operations. However, any type of NWS "warning" issued for the near 
region, outside of Winter Storm Warnings, results in temporary suspension of seeding operations for the 
period during which the warning is in effect. The project meteorologist also had the authority to suspend 
operations in the case of development of weather conditions that were considered dangerous to project 
personnel or the public, even if an official NWS warning had not yet been issued. Appendix A gives more 
in-depth information regarding suspension criteria for the program. 
3.6 Personnel      
 The following personnel were involved in the management and conduct of the 2023-24 Northern 
Utah Aerial Program:  
 
North American Weather Consultants 
Mr. Garrett Cammans, President, Project Director 
Mr. Todd Flanagan, Project Manager/Meteorologist 
Mr. Cole Osborne, Meteorologist 
Mr. David Yorty, Meteorologist 
 
Seeding Operations and Atmospheric Research 
Mr. Gary Walker, President 
Mr. Adam Olsen, On-site Seeding Pilot 
11 
 
4.0   WEATHER DATA AND MODELS USED IN SEEDING OPERATIONS 
Meteorological information is acquired online from a wide variety of sources, including some 
subscriber services.  This information includes weather forecast model data, surface observations, 
rawinsonde (weather balloon) upper -air observations, satellite i mages, radar information and weather 
cameras. NAWC’s meteorologists have access to all meteorological products from their homes, allowing 
continued monitoring and conduct of seeding operations outside of regular business hours. This wide 
variety of available products and information helps NAWC meteorologists to determine when conditions 
are appropriate for cloud seeding.   
Figures 4.1 – 4.6 show examples of some of the available weather information that was used in 
this decision-making process during the 2023 -24 winter season.  These include weather radar images, 
satellite images, upper air wind and temperature maps, rawinso nde/weather balloon soundings and 
aviation hazards. Global and regional forecast models are a cornerstone of modern weather forecasting, 
and an important tool for operational meteorologists.  These models forecast a variety of parameters at 
different levels of the atmosphere, including winds, temperatures, moisture, and surface parameters such 
as accumulated precipitation.  An example of a display is shown from the Global Forecast System (GFS) 
model (Figure 4.7). Other models used on a daily basis during the program include but are not limited to 
the European Center for Medium -Range Weather Forecast (ECMWF) model, High -Resolution Rapid 
Refresh (HRRR) model, and North American Model (NAM).  
 
12 
 
 
Figure 4.1. Weather radar image during a storm event/seeding flight over northern Utah on March 28, 
2024. 
 

13 
 
 
Figure 4.2. Visible spectrum satellite image on March 28, 2024 at 1631 MDT (2231 UTC).  

14 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3. 700 mb (approximately 10,000 feet MSL) map valid for 0600 MDT (1200 UTC) on March 28, 2024. 
Among the more notable map features, contours indicate heights (in decameters) of 700 mb 
pressure level, red numbers are temperature (°C), green numbers  are dewpoints (°C), blue lines 
with barbs/flags represent wind speed and direction.  

15 
 
 
 
Figure 4.4. Weather balloon/rawinsonde sounding from Salt Lake City, valid at 12Z/0600 MDT on March 28, 
2024 showing temperature (red line), dewpoint (green line) and wind speed/direction (right side 
barbs) from the surface to 100 mb (approximately 52,000 feet MSL).  
 
 

16 
 
 
 
Figure 4.5. Significant Meteorological (SIGMET) information detailing severe turbulence hazard in the area 
outlined above on February 26, 2023. Information on SIGMET issuances is available from 
aviationweather.gov. 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
Figure 4.6. Map showing recent lightning strikes across western United States on March 28, 2024 at 1620 
MDT (2220 UTC). Legend shows age of lightning strike via color -coded dots. Courtesy of 
WeatherTap website, https://www.weathertap.com/ . Lightning is a hazard needi ng attention 
with regards to aerial seeding operations. 
 

18 
 
 
Figure 4.7. GFS (Global Forecast Systems) forecast data plot for an approaching storm event on February 
5, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
5.0 OPERATIONS 
The 2023 -24 winter season was fairly busy  in terms of the frequency of storm systems that 
impacted Utah. Near normal to above normal precipitation was recorded statewide.   Precipitation in 
much of the southwestern U.S. was near to above average during the November 2023 – April 2024 period, 
as shown in Figure 5.1.  
 
 
Figure 5.1. November 2023 – April 2024 percent of normal precipitation. 
 
5.1 Operational Procedures 
In operational practice, approaching storms were monitored by NAWC utilizing online weather 
information. If the storm met the seedability criteria presented in Section 2.2, and if no seeding 
curtailments or suspensions were in effect, a flight was dispatch ed to fly along a track determined from 
the prevailing wind flow in place. Seeding continued as long as conditions were favorable and seedable 
clouds remained over the flight track zones and adjacent target area, albeit with time limits as far as how 
many flights/total flight hours were allowed per day. Given the orientation and placement of the northern 
Utah mountain ranges, southwest through northwest wind directions provided the best opportunities to 
impact larger portions of the target areas.  
  

20 
 
5.2 Storm Events of the 2023-2024 Winter Season   
This section describes the storm events that affected Northern Utah that provided opportunities 
for aerial seeding operations during the 2023-2024 operational season. Table 5-1 summarizes the flights 
conducted during the season. A general discussion of the meteorology accompanying each event is given, 
followed by a description of the seeding operations (if any). Wind directions, when provided, are always 
reported in the direction from which the wind is blowing (e.g., a southerly wind means the wind is blowing 
from the south toward the north). Wind speeds are usually reported in nautical miles per hour (knots), 
with 1 knot equal to 1.15 miles per hour. Figures shown in the storm summaries may include the following:  
• Satellite images, including infrared (IR), water vapor (WV), or visible. Infrared images provide 
information during both the day and night which primarily consists of cloud top temperatures. 
Water vapor can be useful when determin ing where mid and upper level dry or moist air exists, 
and visible satellite images can be helpful for observing cloud structure. 
• National Weather Service NEXRAD radar images, showing reflectivity values associated with 
precipitation near the times when seeding occurred. These images give an indication of the type, 
intensity, and extent of precipitation during seeding periods. Wind direction and velocity are also 
observed by the radar through the Doppler feature, which is part of the NEXRAD design. Plots of 
winds with height in  1000-foot increments are available with a 6 -minute time resolution from 
NEXRAD radars. These displays are called Velocity Azimuth Displays (VAD). Full barbs indicate 10 
kt of speed, and half-barbs are 5 kt. A flag indicates 50 kt wind speeds. 
• Skew-T upper-air soundings from several locations, including Salt Lake City, UT, Las Vegas, NV and 
Grand Junction, CO . The skew -T sounding is a plot of temperature, dew point, and winds vs. 
height, observed by a radiosonde (balloon borne weather instrument). This sounding information 
is useful for analyzing various parameters of the atmosphere, providing temperature and 
moisture profiles and convection potential. Soundings are available twice daily at 0500 and 1700 
MST. The 700 mb (approximately 10,000 feet ) temperatures are frequently reported in the 
following storm summaries. NAWC typically prefers to see these temperatures at -5°C or colder 
during seeded periods since silver iodide becomes effective as a seeding agent between -4°C and 
-5°C.  
  
21 
 
Table 5-1 
Summary of Seeding Flights for 2023-2024 
 
Flight Number  Date  Flares (BIP/Ejec)  Flight Hours 
1 November 6 3 / 0 0.80 
2 November 19 13 / 0 1.75 
3 November 19 8 / 25 1.30 
4 January 5 9 / 0 1.23 
5 January 6-7 10 / 0 1.25 
6 January 13 6 / 0 0.92 
7 January 17 15 / 0 2.25 
8 February 1 10 / 0 2.57 
9 February 5 0 / 0 0.50 
10 March 23 10 / 0 1.20 
11 March 28 8 / 0 0.98 
12 March 28 17 / 15 1.78 
13 March 30 18 / 0 1.98 
14 March 30 0 / 25 2.02 
Totals  127 / 65 20.53 
 
 
November 2023 
The 2023-24 season for the Northern Utah Aerial Program began in early November. Four storm 
systems impacted the area during the latter half of the month, two of which saw seeding operations take 
place with three flights occurring. Figure 5.2 shows precipitation for November expressed as a percentage 
of normal (based on 1991-2020 normals) for portions of the Four Corners states, including Utah. Most of 
the state saw below average precipitation, with four exceptions: the central Wasatch Mountains, portions 
of the Uinta Basin, the Tushar Mountains and the far eastern edge of Zion National Park; these areas saw 
above normal precipitation.  
22 
 
 
Figure 5.2. November 2023 precipitation as a percent of average during the month.  

23 
 
November 6, 2023 
An upper level trough of low pressure, with axis oriented from the southern Canadian Prairies 
southwestward to the central California coast, was approaching from the west during the day. A surface 
cold front was located from southern Idaho through central Nevada late in the afternoon and was 
expected to move into northern Utah during the nighttime hours, with frontogenesis expected to increase 
precip along the front mainly north of Salt Lake City. Warm mid-level temperatures were expected to cool 
sufficiently behind the front to around -4°C/-5°C, with west to southwest flow 20-35 kt at 700 mb. As the 
front and associated moisture spread into northern Utah during the evening, a flight plan was developed 
with a north-south track west of the northern Wasatch Mountains and Bear River Range. Figure 5.3 shows 
radar imagery across northern Utah at 2205 MST. The plane departed LGU at 2200 MST and arrived at the 
filed flight altitude of 13,000 feet a short time later. The flight ended up being a short one with a lot o f 
light to moderate turbulence and only pockets of moisture; the pilot reported being in -cloud only a 
fraction of the time. The plane landed back at LGU at 2249 MST, having flown 0.80 hours and burning 3 
burn-in-place (BIP) flares. Figure 5.4 shows the flight data from this event. 
 
 
Figure 5.3. Radar imagery from KMTX (Salt Lake City) valid at 2205 MST on November 6, 2023.  

24 
 
 
Figure 5.4. Flight track from seeding mission on November 6, 2023. Lower  graph indicates altitude of plane 
(green) and speed of plane (yellow) during flight. Green and blue shading in background is radar 
image at time of image capture. Courtesy of FlightAware.com website.  
 
 
November 19, 2023 
 A trough of low pressure was approaching Utah from the west and was absorbing energy from a 
second trough diving southeastward across western Canada. Diffluent flow aloft (e.g., at 500 mb) ahead 
of the trough was spreading across west -central and southwest Utah, enhancing large-scale lift in those 
areas. Thunderstorms were occurring in some of these areas but were expected to remain across central 
and southern Utah. Moisture was spreading across the state with widespread precipitation across the 
western 2/3 of Utah by early morning. Upper air analysis showed that 700 mb temperatures were around 
-2°C/-3°C which is a bit warmer than ideal, but mixing within the cloud layer was expected to transport 
seeding nuclei to colder temperatures. A flight plan was devi sed, using a track from about the center of 
the Great Salt Lake northward to the Idaho border, with the northern Wasatch Mountains and possibly 
Bear River Range as the target area of interest within westerly flow. The plane took off from LGU at 0616 
MST an d reached altitude a short time later. Radar imagery continued to show plenty of moisture 
streaming across the area, as shown in Figure 5.5. The pilot flew a couple passes along the flight track 
before landing back at LGU at 0801 MST, having flown 1.75 hou rs and burning 13 BIP flares. Figure 5.6 
shows the flight track from the first flight. As moisture continued across the area and conditions still 
appeared favorable for seeding, the plane was refueled, and a second flight was launched using the same 

25 
 
track from the first flight. The plane departed LGU at 0958 MST and reached altitude a short time later. 
Winds aloft at this point had become northwesterly, as shown in the VAD display from the Salt Lake City 
radar in Figure 5.7. Seeding occurred along the flight track with a few passes being made, before the plane 
returned to LGU at 1117 MST. A total of 8 BIP flares and 25 ejectables were used for the second flight. The 
flight track from the second flight is shown in Figure 5.8. 
 
 
Figure 5.5. Radar image from KMTX radar valid at 0632 MST on November 19, 2023.  
 

26 
 
 
Figure 5.6. Flight track from first flight on November 19, 2023. 
 

27 
 
 
Figure 5.7. Velocity-Azimuth Display (VAD) from MTX radar showing winds aloft from 7 kft MSL through 50 
kft MSL above the radar. Note wind flow below 16 kft is from the NW at 20 -30 knots. 
 

28 
 
 
Figure 5.8. Flight track from second flight on November 19, 2023. 
 
 
November 2023 Suspensions/Missed Flying Opportunities 
 During the latter half of November, two days saw suspension/no -fly decisions being made with 
respect to operations. On November 16, thunderstorms resulted in a suspension of operations, and on 
November 23, weak winds aloft (i.e., 10 knots or less) and war m flight -level temperatures of -1°C 
precluded seeding operations from taking place. 
 
December 2023 
December turned out to be a rather quiet month in terms of storm systems impacting the state. 
Storm systems affected central and southern Utah on December 1 -3 and again December 8. After that 
time the storm track was removed from Utah for most of the remainder of December, with another storm 
event affecting mainly northern Utah on December 23. No flights occurred during the month, with the 
reasoning given in the suspension/missed opportunities section for December. Fi gure 5.9 shows the 
monthly precipitation across Utah for December as a percent of normal, averaged by basin. 

29 
 
 
Figure 5.9. December 2023 precipitation as a percent of average for the month.  
 

30 
 
December 2023 Suspensions/Missed Flying Opportunities  
On December 3, severe turbulence and associated mountain wave activity due to strong winds 
aloft was occurring across northern and central Utah, preventing any flights from taking place. On 
December 8, a flight was filed for a middle -of-the-night departure; the plane, which had been parked 
outside so a quick departure could take place without a call-out (where airport crew come out during off-
hours to tow the plane out of the hangar) ended up getting coated in ice and could not take off. 
 
January 2024 
After a quiet December in terms of the frequency of storm events that impacted the state, the 
pattern in January shifted to one that saw more storms moving across Utah. Nine storm events affected 
Utah during the month. Four seeding flights occurred during four of these events. Figure 5.10 shows the 
percent-of-average precipitation for January 2024; most locations within the Northern Utah Aerial 
Program’s area of responsibility saw above average precipitation, with below average amounts over the 
eastern Uinta Mountains and Book Cliffs area.  
31 
 
 
Figure 5.10. January 2024 precipitation as a percent of average for the month. 
 
 

32 
 
January 5, 2024 
 A shortwave trough was located over southern Idaho/northern Nevada early in the morning hours 
and was expected to shift southeast into northern Utah later in the morning and across the remainder of 
the state during the afternoon and evening. Moisture assoc iated with the trough was pushing into 
northern Utah ahead of the trough axis and within a weak warm advection regime; still, 700 mb 
temperatures were around -12°C as measured on the morning Salt Lake City sounding. Winds were 
northwesterly ahead of the trough, with a veering to a northerly flow pattern expected behind the trough 
axis. An initial surge of moisture and associated precipitation moved across portions of northern Utah 
southwest of the Wasatch Range during the mid-morning hours. Prior to the noon hour, a second slug of 
moisture tied to the cold front began to push into northern Utah, and this is what the seeding flight was 
going to target. A flight plan was filed with a northeast -southwest track running from the Idaho border 
south of Malad to the  north-central part of the Great Salt Lake; this track would target the moist, 
northwest flow as it moved into the northern Wasatch Mountains. The plane departed LGU at 1105 MST 
and, upon reaching the target altitude of 12 kft, seeding began. Figure 5.11 shows satellite imagery right 
before the plane took off. Area PIREPs ( PIlot REPorts) indicated light rime icing in the area. The plane 
returned to LGU at 1219 MST, having flown for 1.23 hours and burning nine BIP flares. Low ceilings and 
visibilities at LGU prevented a second flight. Figure 5.12 shows the flight track from the mission. 
33 
 
 
Figure 5.11. Visible satellite image taken at 1101 MST on January 5, 2024. 

34 
 
 
Figure 5.12. Flight track data from seeding flight on January 5, 2024. 
 
January 6-7, 2024 
 A strengthening trough was digging southeast across California and Nevada during the evening of 
January 6, aided by a jet streak diving southeastward on the backside of the trough. Deep southwest flow 
was in place across Utah. The upper jet axis was expect ed to shift to a position across Arizona and the 
Four Corners area by early morning of January 7 around the same time a cold front associated with the 
trough was expected to cross northern Utah, with winds veering to northwesterly behind the front. 700 
mb temperatures were around -8°C on the Jan 7/00Z sounding and were expected to drop into the -12°C 
to -15°C range later in the morning on January 7. Although moisture appeared to be of low quality via 
soundings, satellite analysis and model output, a PIREP o n the evening of January 6 indicated moderate 
rime icing at 13 kft over Ogden. A flight plan was filed using a track from the Idaho border south to the 
center of the Great Salt Lake, with the Wasatch Mountains the primary target. The plane departed LGU at 
2350 MST on January 6 and made a couple of passes along the track, burning 10 BIP flares during the 
flight. The pilot reported only brief pockets of moisture during the flight, landing back at LGU at 0105 MST 

35 
 
on January 7, having flown for 1.25 hours. An infrared satellite image from during the flight is shown in 
Figure 5.13, and flight track data is shown in Figure 5.14. 
 
 
Figure 5.13. Infrared satellite image from 0011 MST on January 7, 2024. Note the extensive cloud cover across 
Utah, with yellow and orange colors indicating colder cloud tops with green indicating warmer 
cloud tops. 

36 
 
 
Figure 5.14. Flight track data from January 6-7, 2024 seeding flight. 
 
January 13, 2024 
 A broad trough of low pressure covered much of the United States, with the axis aligned roughly 
across the central portion of the country, while a highly amplified ridge of high pressure was located off 
the West Coast; this pattern setup put Utah under gen eral northwest flow aloft. Embedded within the 
trough were several shortwave disturbances, one of which was located near the Pacific Northwest during 
the early evening of January 13. The flow ahead of this shortwave disturbance had induced a backing of 
the winds aloft over Utah to a more westerly direction. Moisture availability was marginal with PWAT 
values in the 0.35 -0.50” range across northern Utah, but sufficient for precipitation across the area. A 
flight plan was filed using a track from the central Great Salt Lake to the Idaho border, with the Wasatch 
Mountains the target of seeding operations within westerly flow of 20-30 kt. After some delays related to 
ceilings and needing to get a helicopter out of the way, the plane departed LGU at 1805 MST. 
Temperatures at flight level (12 kft) were -9°C. The pilot reported only “sporadic” moisture pockets, 
enough to burn six BIP flares before having to cut the flight short and return to LGU at 1900 MST as 
northern Utah airports were all falling below minimums for flights with greater moisture arriving from the 
south. Radar imagery during the flight is shown in Figure 5.15, while Figure 5.16 shows the flight 
data/track. 

37 
 
 
Figure 5.15. Radar imagery from 1830 MST on January 13 showing moisture across the western half of Utah.  

38 
 
 
Figure 5.16. Flight track from seeding flight on January 13, 2024. 
 
January 17, 2024 
 Earlier in the day, a shortwave disturbance moved across northern and central Utah bringing a 
round of light to moderate snow to the area. Although low levels were stable, moisture was certainly 
present. However with all area airports in northern Utah below  visibility minimums, a flight could not 
launch. Later in the day, a second impulse of energy over southern Idaho approached northern Utah 
accompanied by lift and a wave of precipitation. 700 mb temperatures were around -8°C and model data 
indicated some supercooled liquid water (SLW) present. Figure 5.17 shows the sounding from Salt Lake 
City at 00Z on January 18 (1700 MST on January 17). With westerly flow in place that was expected to veer 
to northwesterly, a flight plan was filed with, once again, a north -south track from the Idaho border 
southward to the central Great Salt Lake targeting the northern Wasatch Mountains and Bear River Range. 
The plane departed LGU at 2118 MST and, upon reaching altitude, began seeding operations. During the 
flight, a couple of PIREPs were received indicating light to moderate icing occurring in the 12-14 kft layer. 
As the pilot was wrapping up the mission a nd beginning his return to LGU, the airport manager 
inexplicably closed the airport, and the pilot was left trying to work with the FAA on why that occurred 
and where to land. After some effort, the pilot was able to land at Brigham City Airport (BMC) at 2 333 
MST, having burned 15 BIP flares. Figure 5.18 shows the flight track data. 

39 
 
 
Figure 5.17. Sounding from Salt Lake City, valid at 0000 UTC January 18 (1700 MST January 17). Note the west 
to northwest flow in place at and above 700 mb, with a dry pocket around 3 km above ground 
level (approximately 14 kft MSL). 

40 
 
 
Figure 5.18. Flight track from seeding flight on January 17, 2024. 
 
January 2024 Suspensions/Missed Flying Opportunities 
 On January 9, the threat (and eventual presence of) scattered thunderstorms prevented any 
flights from taking place. On January 10-12, during periods of precipitation, pockets of severe turbulence 
arising from strong winds and resultant mountain waves deemed the area unsafe for flying/seeding. Also, 
on January 12 into early on January 13, very cold temperatures aloft ( -17°C at flight altitude) precluded 
any seeding operations. On January 25, early in the storm event Logan Airport (LGU) was socked in with 
low clouds and low visibilities, and then by the time it began to mix out, moisture levels have decreased 
across northern Utah, and also upper level winds were very weak (< 10 kt). 
 
February 2024 
The active weather pattern that was observed in Utah in January continued into February with a 
number of storm events affecting Utah. Eight storm events impacted the state during the month, yet in 
spite of the active pattern, only two flights were able to launch early in the month. Further discussion will 
describe the issues that affected flying during the month in the next sub -section. Figure 5.19 shows the 
monthly precipitation for February as a percentage of average precipitation for the month. All areas saw 
above normal precipitation. 

41 
 
 
Figure 5.19 February 2024 precipitation as a percent of average for the month. 
 

42 
 
February 1, 2024   
A trough of low pressure pushing into the west coast states was in the process of splitting, with 
the southern piece of energy expected to move across southern Nevada/northern Arizona/southern Utah 
during the nighttime hours. Ahead of this system, moist southerly flow and warm advection was pushing 
into the state from the west. Over northern Utah, a dry sub-cloud layer was in place for much of the day, 
but as the warm, moist advection ramped up, the sub-cloud layer did moisten up to where precipitation 
was able to reach the surface. Figure 5.20 shows the 700 mb map valid at 1700 MST. Given the broad 
southerly flow in place, a seeding flight targeting the Uinta Mountains was planned, with a flight track on 
the south side of the Uinta Range at 13 -14 kft. The p lane departed LGU at 1957 MST and headed 
southeast, reaching the western end of the flight track about an hour later upon which seeding 
commenced once moisture was observed. The plane flew down the length of the Uinta Range and back, 
then returning to LGU, landing at 2231 MST. Ten BIP flares were used for seeding, with the pilot reporting 
only marginal amounts of moisture. Flight track data is shown in Figure 5.21.  
 
 
Figure 5.20. 700 mb map valid at 1700 MST on February 1, 2024. Note the trough located over the west coast 
states with southerly flow across Utah bringing in higher moisture content (green isopleths).  
 
 

43 
 
 
Figure 5.21. Flight track data from seeding flight on February 1, 2024. 
 
February 5, 2024 
 A large trough, with axis oriented northeast to southwest, was located off the West Coast. An 
Atmospheric River (AR) extended from east of Hawaii up into the trough and across southern California, 
Nevada and into Utah; moisture concentration was lower across Utah compared to California, as is typical 
since much of it gets depleted by major mountain ranges. The trough was forecast to dig southward and 
elongate near the West Coast which was expected to pivot the moisture band further to the west by 
nighttime. Rain and snow were falling across northern Utah within this weakened AR, and area PIREPs 
were mentioning light to occasionally moderate rime icing. With strong southwest winds 35 -65 kt 
between 700 and 500 mb and WAT values of 0.45”, the potential for at least an exploratory  flight was 
there, and a flight plan was crafted with a northwest -southeast orientation extending from near 
Tremonton to Ogden targeting the northern Wasatch Mountains and Bear River Range. The pilot departed 
LGU at 1445 MST and, while climbing to flight altitude, encountered a pocket of heavy icing that was not 
able to be fully shed with the de -icing boots, thus the plane had to abort the mission and make a quick 
return to LGU, landing at 1515 MST. No seeding was done. Figure 5.22 shows the flight track. No additional 
flights took place. 

44 
 
 
Figure 5.22. Flight track data from flight on February 5, 2024. 
 
February 2024 Suspensions/Missed Flying Opportunities  
During the storm event on February 6 -8, strong winds aloft (> 50 knots) and the threat of 
thunderstorms precluded flights from taking place. With the storm on February 15, the FAA debriefer 
alerted the pilot to the presence of extensive (yet mainly light to occasionally moderate) icing, particularly 
concentrated near the frontal boundary expected to affect the area and mentioned the difficulty that may 
be encountered with the de-icing equipment due to icing rates in that area; because of this, the flight was 
aborted. Temperatures on February 16 were too cold aloft for effective seeding operations (i.e., below -
15°C). On February 19, PIREPs indicated light to moderate mixing icing (clear and rime) occurring across 
northern Utah. With considerations to the difficulty in shedding clear icing compared to rime icing, and 
with an extended period of this expected to occur, a scheduled flight was aborted. The final storm of the 
month on February 26-27 brought a myriad of flying conditions, including moderate to occasionally severe 
icing, strong winds aloft and a thunderstorm threat.  
  

45 
 
March 2024 
The active weather pattern that began in January across much of the western U.S. continued 
through March, with nine storm events affecting the state, distributed uniformly over the month. The 
Northern Utah Aerial Program flew five flights over three storm events during the latter part of March. 
Earlier storms contained hazards that were difficult for flying, which are p resented in the Suspensions 
sub-section. Precipitation for the month was above normal across northern Utah, as were SWE values. 
Figure 5.23 shows the precipitation for the month across the western U.S. as a percentage of average 
precipitation for March. 
46 
 
 
Figure 5.23. March 2024 precipitation as a percent of average for the month. 
 

47 
 
March 23, 2024  
 An upper low was located over Oregon with the associated trough extending southward to west 
of southern California/northern Baja. On the forward/east side of the trough, a strong cold front was 
located across southern Idaho and eastern Nevada and was forecast to move across Utah during the late 
afternoon/evening with rain, snow and isolated thunderstorms. Southwest flow was in place ahead of the 
front with 700 mb winds of 20-40 kt. After some evaluation of the weather and a discussion with the pilot, 
a flight plan was developed with a north -northwest to south -southeast track from near Tremonton to 
near Ogden, targeting the northern Wasatch Mountains and Bear River Range. The plane departed LGU 
at 1444 MDT, reaching the flight altitude of 12 kft a short time  later. With moisture being observed, 
seeding commenced. The plane continued to fly along the track before returning to LGU, landing at 1556 
MDT. Ten BIP flares were used for seeding, with the pilot indicating some moisture/ice sticking to the 
plane during the mission. A second flight was planned for early evening, but lightning concerns and a 
convective SIGMET for the area resulted in a no-fly decision for the second flight. Figure 5.24 shows a map 
of lightning strikes during the late afternoon/early eveni ng hours valid at 1810 MDT. Severe turbulence 
was reported during the evening between Salt Lake City and Provo. Figure 5.25 shows the flight track data 
from the mission.  
 
 
Figure 5.24.  Lightning strike map valid at 1810 MDT on March 23, 2024. Color of dots indicate age, shown in 
legend. Courtesy of WeatherTap.com .  

48 
 
 
Figure 5.25. Flight track data from seeding flight on March 23, 2024. 
 
March 28, 2024  
 An upper low was centered near Vancouver Island with a trough extending southward from the 
low into the Pacific Northwest and northern California. To the southeast of the trough, diffluent flow aloft 
was spreading across Nevada and northern Utah which was enhancing large-scale lift and precipitation 
development. A shortwave disturbance embedded within the trough’s flow pattern was expected to move 
across northern and central Utah during the day with its accompanying cold front expected to move in 
during the afternoon before stalling across central Utah during the night. Area soundings showed PWAT 
values around 0.30 -0.40” along with 700 mb temperatures around -4°C. The front was expected to 
undergo frontogenesis (i.e., strengthening) as it moved into norther n Utah, with increasing potential for 
thunderstorms. A flight plan was developed for a flight ahead of the front, with a track similar to the one 
flown on March 23, extending from near Tremonton to Ogden and targeting mainly the northern Wasatch 
Mountains. The plane departed at 1126 MDT and reached a cruising altitude of 12 kft a short time later. 
Seeding soon commenced within the band of moisture, but the band was quickly lifting north and after a 
short flight, the plane returned to LGU at 1225 having burned 8 BIP flares. Figure 5.26 shows a visible 

49 
 
satellite image taken during the flight. Figure 5.27 shows the flight track data from the first flight. With 
another round of precipitation approaching northern Utah, a second flight was planned, this time 
targeting the western Uinta Mountains. A flight plan was developed, with a track over the Wasatch Back 
from near Coalville to Heber City. The plane took off a second time from LGU at 1503 and reached the 
flight track zone a short time later. During the second flight, a cluster of thunderstorms producing 
abundant lightning strikes passed just south of Heber City. Figure 5.28 shows radar imagery during the 
second flight, noting the lightning strikes near HCR (Heber City). The plane returned to LGU at 1650 MDT, 
having burned 17 BIP flares along with 15 ejectables; the pilot reported plenty of moisture present during 
the mission. Figure 5.29 shows the flight track data from the second mission. 
 
 
Figure 5.26. Visible satellite image taken at 1201 MDT on March 28, 2024.  
 

50 
 
 
Figure 5.27. Flight track data from first seeding flight on March 28, 2024. 
 

51 
 
 
Figure 5.28.  Radar image with lightning strikes superimposed from 1555 MDT on March 28, 2024. Note 
cluster of strikes south of Heber City (KHCR). 
 

52 
 
 
Figure 5.29. Flight track data from second flight on March 28, 2024. 
 
March 30, 2024  
 A cold closed upper low was located off the northern California coast west of San Francisco and 
was slowly pushing southward. The associated trough axis, oriented in a northeast -southwest fashion, 
extended from the central Canadian Prairies through the Great Bas in (west of UT) and off the California 
coast. On the forward side of the trough, diffluent flow aloft was spreading across Utah within a south to 
southwesterly flow regime. A frontal boundary that had been stretched across central Utah was moving 
back northward as a warm front. The south/southwesterly flow was expected to increase during the day, 
with the diffluent pattern aiding in increasing large -scale lift and subsequent development of rain and 
snow across central and northern Utah. PWAT values w ere around 0.45” as measured on the morning 
sounding from Salt Lake City, and a fairly moist atmospheric profile existed up to around 300 mb 
(approximately 34 kft MSL). 700 mb temperatures were ideal, around -5°C.  For this day, seeding for the 
Uinta Mountains appeared to be the best targeted effort at seeding, and a flight plan was developed with 
a flight track south of the Uinta range, from roughly Tabiona to Whiterocks. The plane left LGU at 1004 

53 
 
MDT and initially ascended to 12 kft, but after about an hour the pilot was re-positioned up to 16 kft prior 
to getting to the flight track zone. The pilot began firing flares upon reaching the south side of the Uintas 
and seeding continued for about an ho ur before the plane turned to head back to LGU, landing at 1203 
MDT, having burned 18 BIP flares with the pilot reporting that there were pockets of “good moisture”. 
Figure 5.30 shows visible satellite imagery from 1121 MDT, during the flight, and Figure 5 .31 shows the 
flight data from this first flight. As conditions continued to be favorable for seeding, the plane refueled 
and launched at 1240 MDT, once again heading down to the same flight track zone, only this time the 
plane’s cruising altitude was 14 k ft. Seeding commenced and continued for over an hour with what the 
pilot again described as “pockets of decent moisture” before the plane headed back to LGU, landing at 
1441 MDT and having burned 25 ejectable flares. Figure 5.32 shows a radar image during the second flight, 
and Figure 5.33 shows the flight data from the second flight. 
54 
 
 
Figure 5.30. Visible satellite image from 1121 MDT on March 30, 2024. 

55 
 
 
Figure 5.31. Flight track data from first seeding flight on March 30, 2024. 
 

56 
 
 
Figure 5.32.  Radar image from 1335 MDT on March 30, 2024 during second flight.  
 

57 
 
 
Figure 5.33. Flight track data from second flight on March 30, 2024. 
 
March 2024 Suspensions/Missed Flying Opportunities  
For the storm events in the first half of the month, a combination of scattered thunderstorms 
(March 2-3, 7, 12), strong winds aloft (March 2-3) and very cold temperatures outside of the desired -5°C 
to -15°C range (March 2 -3) resulted in flying suspensions in place. Thunderstorms during the se eding 
mission on March 28 occurred after the plane was airborne, but the activity remained just outside of the 
flight track zone. 
 
 
April 2024 
The busy weather pattern that had been in place for much of the winter began to settle down a 
bit in April, however there were still two storm events that impacted Utah during the first half of the 
month. Due to the nature of the storms themselves, no seeding flights took place during the month, with 
explanations given in the following sub-section. Figure 5.34 shows the precipitation across Utah for April. 
In spite of the two storm systems that affected Utah, precipitation for the month was well below normal. 

58 
 
 
Figure 5.34. April 2024 precipitation as a percent of average for the month. 
 
 

59 
 
April 2024 Suspensions/Missed Flying Opportunities 
With the storm on April 5 -6, strong southerly winds up to 60 knots were observed from the Salt 
Lake City radar; this was not an ideal setup for aerial seeding in terms of targeting the north -south 
mountain ranges and the speed with which the wind was blowi ng. On April 15, an upper low moving 
across the state resulted in a wind regime across northern Utah that did not allow for proper targeting of 
the mountain ranges until most of the precipitation had ended. 
 
  
60 
 
6.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The 2023-24 winter season marked the inaugural year of operation for the Northern Utah Aerial 
Program (NUAP) which followed a design similar to the sister project, the Southern Utah Aerial Program 
(SUAP). An active weather pattern for much of the winter re sulted in an above normal snowpack and 
above normal precipitation for the northern half of Utah. Despite the active weather pattern in place, only 
14 flights over 10 storm events were able to launch to conduct seeding operations. Reasons for this are 
presented below. 
In many instances, weather conditions were the reason for suspensions or missed opportunities: 
lightning, severe turbulence and icing, temperatures too cold or too warm for effective seeding (i.e., 
outside of the -5°C to -15°C range), ceilings and visibilities below minimums and strong winds at or above 
60 kt. These sorts of issues are expected on a seasonal basis and were not entirely surprising, although 
the frequency with which conditions resulted in “no-fly” decisions were surprising. In one case, a decision 
that was made in an attempt to expedite an overnight flight turned out to contribute directly to the 
cancellation of the flight; ahead of one storm event in December, where it was believed that having the 
plane parked outside for an overnight flight would make for a fast turn -around as it avoided having to 
make a ”call-out”, the decision ended up costing a flight as the plane became coated in ice and could not 
be flown until the ice had melted, a problem that would not have occurred if the plane had r emained in 
the hangar. Furthermore, the Logan -Cache Airport (LGU) sits in the Cache Valley, which frequently is 
subject to strong inversions and periods of fog/low clouds and low visibility in the December -February 
period, which can make seeding flights di fficult if ceilings and visibilities are below minimum thresholds 
for taking off/landing.  
Unlike with SUAP, no pre -determined fixed tracks were set for NUAP, but instead tracks were 
chosen on a storm -by-storm case, fitting in with the given atmospheric conditions accompanying each 
storm. Most of the seeding flights this first season focused on the northern Wasatch Mountains and Bear 
River Range, with the Uinta Mountains seeing the remainder of the seeding efforts. It is important when 
discussing the seeding targeting with this program to keep in mind that some areas are/were off -limits 
for the a ircraft tracks , particularly the area west of the central Wasatch Mountains due to the 
concentration of the population from roughly Ogden southward to Provo. This area also experiences the 
most amount of air traffic in the state with Salt Lake City International Airport located here. Military 
airspace is also located nearby, in Tooele County and this area is also off-limits. 
With regards to communication with the pilot while airborne, for the 2023-24 season, there was 
no satellite phone in the plane, and texting did not work with the plane and meteorologist at opposite 
ends of the state. Although this did not negatively impact seeding operations, going forward, it is strongly 
advised that there should be a method of communication available to the pilot and meteorologist during 
flights. A satellite phone or similar device that would, at least allow for texting between pilot and 
meteorologist should be utilized. 
NAWC considers the primary season for NUAP to be more of a learning experience versus a 
success considering the amount of “no -fly” decisions that were made, particularly given the active 
61 
 
weather pattern that was in place for a majority of the season. Decisions regarding the use of a slightly 
different approach to seeding could be (and could have been) made for certain situations, such as flying 
near the top of cloud decks given ample moist ure and ideal temperatures if in -cloud seeding becomes 
susceptible to excessive icing, for example. The approach to aerial cloud seeding for NUAP was done in a 
manner more similar to operations with the Kings Program in central California, which was almost  
exclusively in-cloud seeding, accounting for excess ice accumulation by descending to a lower, warmer 
altitude to shed ice before returning to altitude. One stark difference is that most times in Utah in the 
winter, descending to a lower altitude to shed ice would not be possible given the usual cold airmasses in 
place, with freezing temperatures all the way to the surface. In these cases, the “on-top” seeding method 
may have to be used more often. 
NAWC believes, for future seasons, that the best approach for aerial seeding in Utah, would be to 
station a seeding aircraft at St. George in the far southwest part of the state and focus aerial seeding 
efforts on the central and southern parts of Utah. Ground-based seeding sites in that portion of the state 
are also less concentrated compared to the network of ground seeding sites across northern Utah. While 
central and southern Utah would be the main focus for seeding efforts from the air, in the event th at an 
incoming storm might only impact northern Utah, a decision could be made to temporarily position the 
aircraft in or nearby northern Utah locations and conduct seeding operations as long as safe flying and 
ideal seeding conditions allow.  Perhaps seeding for the NUAP could also be focused on only some portions 
of the season (e.g. November, plus March – April) with the aircraft stationed elsewhere such as in southern 
Utah during the December – February period. If it is desired that NUAP continues as is for a second season, 
it is suggested that a different airport be chosen for stationing the plane, one that does not suffer from 
inversions in the manner that is seen at LGU. The airport should also have hangar space to house the plane 
from icing conditions, and ideally might have fuel access 24/7. 
  
62 
 
APPENDIX A 
SUSPENSION CRITERIA 
  
63 
 
Certain situations require temporary or longer -term suspension of cloud seeding activities, with 
reference to well -considered criteria for consideration of possible suspensions, to minimize either an 
actual or apparent contribution of seeding to a potentia lly hazardous situation. The ability to forecast 
(anticipate) and judiciously avoid hazardous conditions is very important in limiting any potential liability 
associated with weather modification and to maintain a positive public image.  
There are three primary hazardous situations around which suspension criteria have been 
developed. These are:  
• Excess snowpack accumulation  
• Rain-induced winter flooding 
• Severe weather 
Excess Snowpack Accumulation  
 Snowpack begins to accumulate in the mountainous areas of Utah in November and continues 
through April.  The heaviest average accumulations normally occur from January through  March.  
Excessive snowpack water content becomes a potential hazard during the resultant snowmelt.  The 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) maintains a network of high elevation snowpack 
measurement sites in the State of Utah, known as the SNOTEL network.  SNOTEL automated observations 
are now readily available, updated as often as hourly.  The following set of criteria, based upon 
observations from these SNOTEL site observations, has been developed as a guide  for potential 
suspension of operations. 
64 
 

65 
 
Snowpack-related suspension considerations will be assessed on a geographical division or sub -
division basis. The NRCS has divided the State of Utah into 13 such divisions as follows: Bear River, Weber-
Ogden Rivers, Provo River -Utah Lake-Jordan River, Tooe le Valley-Vernon Creek, Green River, Duchesne 
River, Price-San Rafael, Dirty Devil, Southeastern Utah, Sevier River, Beaver River, Escalante River, and 
Virgin River.  Since SNOTEL observations are available on a daily basis, suspensions (and cancellation o f 
suspensions) can be made on a daily basis using linear interpolation of the first of month criteria.   There 
are a number of SNOTEL stations in the various basins of central and southern Utah on which these criteria 
are based.  These include Castle Valle y, Harris Flat, and Farnsworth Lake in the Sevier Basin; Midway 
Valley, Kolob, Harris Flat, Webster Flat, and Long Flat in southwestern Utah; and Rocky Basin Settlement 
and Mining Fork in eastern Tooele County.   
Streamflow forecasts, reservoir storage levels, soil moisture content and amounts of precipitation 
in prior seasons are other factors which need to be considered when the potential for suspending seeding 
operations due to excess snowpack water content exists.  
Rain-induced Winter Floods  
 The potential for wintertime flooding from rainfall on low elevation snowpack is fairly high in 
some (especially the more southern) target areas during the late winter/early spring period.  Every 
precaution must be taken to insure accurate forecasting and timely suspension of operations during these 
potential flood-producing situations.  The objective of suspension under these conditions is to eliminate 
both the real and/or perceived impact of weather modification when any increase in precipitation has the 
potential of creating a flood hazard. 
Severe Weather  
 During periods of hazardous weather associated with both winter orographic and convective 
precipitation systems it is sometimes necessary or advisable for the National Weather Service (NWS) to 
issue special weather bulletins advising the public of the weather phenomena and the attendant hazards.  
Each phenomenon is described in terms of criteria used by the NWS in issuing special weather bulletins.  
Those which may be relevant in the conduct of winter cloud seeding programs include the following: 
 
▪ Winter Storm Warning - This is issued by the NWS when it expects heavy snow warning 
criteria to be met, along with strong winds/wind chill or freezing precipitation.  
▪ Flash Flood Warning  - This is issued by the NWS when flash flooding is imminent or in 
progress.  In the Intermountain West, these warnings are generally issued relative to, but 
are not limited to, fall or spring convective systems. 
▪ Severe Thunderstorm Warning  – This is issued by the NWS when thunderstorms 
producing winds of 58 mph or higher and/or 1” or larger hail. 
▪ SIGMETs – SIGnificant METeorological Information regarding the presence of convection 
(thunderstorms), significant icing or turbulence that could be hazardous to aircraft 
 
Seeding operations may be suspended whenever the NWS issues a weather warning for or 
adjacent to any target area.  Since the objective of the cloud seeding program is to increase winter 
66 
 
snowfall in the mountainous areas of the state, operations will typically not be suspended when Winter 
Storm Warnings are issued, unless there are special considerations (e.g., a heavy storm that impacts 
Christmas Eve travel).   
Flash Flood and Severe Thunderstorm Warnings are usually issued when intense convective 
activity causing heavy rainfall/strong winds/hail is expected or is occurring.  Although the probability of 
this situation occurring during our core operational seeding  periods is low, the potential does exist, 
especially over southern sections  of the state during late March and April.  The type of storm that may 
cause problems is one that has the potential of producing 1 -2 inches (or greater) of rainfall in 
approximately a 24 -hour period, combined with high freezing levels (e.g., > 8,000 feet MSL).  Seeding 
operations will be suspended for the duration of the warning period in the affected areas. 
SIGMETs are crucial to airborne seeding operations, as their issuances relate to the presence of 
hazardous conditions that may result in temporary suspensions. Convective SIGMETs are issued when 
thunderstorms are expected to impact a given area, and generally last up to two hours at a time but may 
be re -issued if the threat continues. Non -convective SIGMETs are issued for hazards such as 
severe/extreme turbulence or severe icing, and last up to four hours at a time, again, with the potential 
for extensions if these conditions continue to exist. 
NAWC’s project meteorologists have the authority to temporarily suspend localized seeding 
operations due to development of hazardous severe weather conditions even if the NWS has not issued 
a warning.  This would be a rare event, but it is important for the operator to have this latitude. 
 
 
 
  
67 
 
APPENDIX B 
 
GLOSSARY OF METEOROLOGICAL TERMS 
  
68 
 
Advection: Movement of an air mass.   Cold advection describes a colder air mass moving into the area, 
and warm advection is used to describe an incoming warmer air mass.  Dry and moist advection can be 
used similarly. 
 
Air Mass /airmass: A term used to describe a region of the atmosphere with certain defining 
characteristics.  For example, a cold or warm air mass, or a wet or dry air mass.  It is a fairly subjective 
term but is usually used in reference to large (synoptic scale) regions of  the atmosphere, both near the 
surface and/or at mid and upper levels of the atmosphere. 
 
Atmospheric River/AR: A long, narrow and transient corridor of strong horizontal water vapor transport 
that is typically associated with a low level jet stream ahead of the cold front of a low pressure system. 
The water vapor in ARs is supplied by tropical and subtropical moisture sources and frequently produces 
heavy precipitation where they are forced upward, e.g., by mountains or dynamic lifting. 
 
Balloon Sounding: see Sounding. 
 
Cell: in radar usage, a local maximum in radar reflectivity that undergoes a life cycle of growth and decay, 
having both an updraft and a downdraft region. 
 
Cold-core low: A typical mid-latitude type of low pressure system, where the core of the system is colder 
than its surroundings.  This type of system is also defined by the cyclonic circulation being strongest in the 
upper levels of the atmosphere.  The opposite is a warm-core low, which typically occurs in the tropics. 
 
Cold Pool: An air mass that is cold relative to its surroundings and may be confined to a particular basin. 
 
Condensation: Phase change of water vapor into liquid form.   This can occur on the surface of objects 
(such as dew on the grass) or in mid -air (leading to the formation of clouds).  Clouds are technically 
composed of water in liquid form, not water vapor.  
 
Confluent: Wind vectors coming closer together in a two -dimensional frame of reference (opposite of 
diffluent).  The term convergence is also used similarly. 
 
Convective (or convection):  Pertains to the development of precipitation areas due to the rising of 
warmer, moist air through the surrounding air mass.  The warmth and moisture contained in a given air 
mass makes it lighter than colder, dryer air.  Convection often leads to small-scale, locally heavy showers 
or thundershowers.   The opposite precipitation type is known as stratiform precipitation. 
 
Convergence: Refers to the converging of wind vectors at a given level of the atmosphere.  Low -level 
convergence (along with upper -level divergence), for instance, is associated with lifting of the air mass 
which usually leads to development of clouds and precipitation .  Low-level divergence (and upper -level 
convergence) is associated with atmospheric subsidence, which leads to drying and warming. 
 
Cyclonic Flow: Counter-clockwise motion, primarily around low pressure (cyclone). 
 
Deposition: A phase change where water vapor turns directly to solid form (ice).  The opposite process is 
called sublimation. 
 
69 
 
Dew point:  The temperature at which condensation occurs (or would occur) with a given amount of 
moisture in the air. 
 
Diffluent: Wind vectors spreading further apart in a two -dimensional frame of reference; opposite of 
confluent. 
 
Disturbance: see Low pressure, shortwave. 
 
Dry slot: A zone of dry (and usually cloud-free) air that wraps into the southern and eastern parts of a low 
pressure system; easily viewed on satellite imagery. 
 
Entrain: Usually used in reference to the process of a given air mass being ingested into a storm system. 
 
Evaporation: Phase change of liquid water into water vapor.  Water vapor is usually invisible to the eye. 
 
El Ni ño: A reference to a particular phase of oceanic and atmospheric temperature and circulation 
patterns in the tropical Pacific, where the prevailing easterly trade winds weaken or dissipate.  Often has 
an effect on mid-latitude patterns as well, such as increased precipitation in southern portions of the U.S. 
and decreased precipitation further north.  The opposite phase is called La Nina. 
 
Front (or frontal zone): Reference to a temperature boundary with either incoming colder air (cold front) 
or incoming warmer air ( warm front ); can sometimes be a reference to a stationary temperature 
boundary line (stationary front) or a more complex type known as an occluded front (where the 
temperature change across a boundary can vary in type at different elevations).     
 
Frontal band: A band of clouds/precipitation along a cold or warm front. 
 
Glaciogenic: Ice-forming (aiding the process of nucleation); usually used in reference to cloud seeding 
nuclei. 
 
GMT (or UTC, or Z) time:  Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at 
Greenwich, England.   Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7 
hours. 
 
Graupel: A precipitation type that can be described as “soft hail”, that develops due to riming (nucleation 
around a central core).  It is composed of opaque (white) ice, not clear hard ice such as that contained in 
hailstones.  It usually indicated the presence of  convective clouds and can be associated with electrical 
charge separation and occasionally lightning activity. 
 
High Pressure (or Ridge):  Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable weather.  
Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic (clockwise) 
circulation pattern. 
 
Infrared (satellite): imagery sensed in the 3 -13 μm wavelength region of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
usually referring to the thermal infrared region. 
 
70 
 
Inside Slider: A trough or area of low pressure that moves south-southeast along or parallel to the Sierra 
Nevada mountains before swinging east into the Great Basin or Desert Southwest. These systems typically 
do not have much moisture with them but can have cold to v ery cold air accompanying them. The track 
of these systems typically brings Santa Ana winds as they increase the northeast -southwest pressure 
gradient. 
 
Inversion: Refers to a layer of the atmosphere in which the temperature increases with elevation, usually 
associated with stability. 
 
Jet Stream or Upper -Level Jet (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track):  A region of 
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track 
in the mid-latitudes.  This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-latitude 
synoptic-scale storm development. 
 
La Niña: The opposite phase of that known as El Nino in the tropical Pacific.  During La Nina the easterly 
tropical trade winds strengthen and can lead in turn to a strong mid -latitude storm track, which often 
brings wetter weather to northern portions of the U.S.   
 
Longwave (or longwave pattern): The longer wavelengths, typically on the order of 1,000 – 2,000+ miles 
of the typical ridge/trough pattern around the northern (or southern) Hemisphere, typically most 
pronounced in the mid-latitudes. 
 
Low-Level Jet: A zone of maximum wind speed in the lower atmosphere.  Can be caused by geographical 
features or various weather patterns and can influence storm behavior and dispersion of cloud seeding 
materials. 
 
Low pressure (or low or trough): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather.  
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic 
(counterclockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere.   
 
Mesoscale: Sub-synoptic scale, about 100 miles or less; this is the size scale of more localized weather 
features (such as thunderstorms or mountain-induced weather processes). 
 
Microphysics: Used in reference to composition and particle types in a cloud. 
 
Mid-level: the layer of the atmosphere from 10-20 kft. 
 
Millibar (mb): a unit of pressure equal to 100 newtons per square meter (N/m2). 
 
MSL (Mean Sea Level): Elevation height reference in comparison to sea level. 
 
Negative (ly) tilted trough: A low-pressure trough where a portion is undercut, such that a frontal zone 
can be in a northwest to southeast orientation. 
 
Nucleation: The process of supercooled water droplets in a cloud turning to ice.  This is the process that 
is aided by cloud seeding.  For purposes of cloud seeding, there are three possible types of cloud 
71 
 
composition:  Liquid (temperature above the freezing point), supercooled (below freezing but still in liquid 
form), and ice crystals.   
 
Nuclei: Small particles that aid water droplet or ice particle formation in a cloud. 
 
Orographic: Terrain-induced weather processes, such as cloud or precipitation development on the 
upwind side of a mountain range.  Orographic lift refers to the lifting of an air mass as it encounters a 
mountain range. 
 
Precipitable Water, or PWAT: The total atmospheric water vapor contained in a vertical column of unit 
cross-sectional area extending between the surface and top of the atmosphere, expressed in terms of the 
depth to which that water substance would be if completely condensed and colle cted in a vessel of the 
same unit cross-section. 
 
Pressure Heights (e.g., 700 millibars, or mb): Corresponds to approximately 10,000 feet above sea level 
(MSL); 850 mb corresponds to about 5,000 feet MSL; and 500 mb corresponds to about 18,000 feet MSL.  
These are standard height levels that are occasionally referenced, with the 700 mb level most important 
regarding cloud-seeding potential in most of the western U.S. 
 
Positive (ly) tilted trough: A normal U-shaped trough configuration, where an incoming cold front would 
generally be in a northeast– southwest orientation. 
 
Reflectivity: The density of returned signal from a radar beam, which is typically bounced back due to 
interaction with precipitation particles (either frozen or liquid) in the atmosphere.  The reflectivity 
depends on the size, number, and type of particles that the radar beam encounters. 
 
Ridge (or High Pressure System):  Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable 
weather.  Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic 
(clockwise) circulation pattern. 
 
Ridge axis: The longitude band corresponding to the high point of a ridge. 
 
Rime (or rime ice): Ice buildup on an object (often on an existing precipitation particle) due to the freezing 
of supercooled water droplets. 
 
Shortwave (or shortwave disturbance): Smaller-scale wave features of the weather pattern typically seen 
at mid -latitudes, usually on the order of a few to several hundred miles; these often correspond to 
individual frontal systems. 
 
Silver iodide: A compound commonly used in cloud seeding because of the similarity of its molecular 
structure to that of an ice crystal.  This structure helps in the process of nucleation, where supercooled 
cloud water changes to ice crystal form. 
 
Sounding: A measurement of the vertical distribution of physical properties of the atmospheric column 
such as temperature, dewpoint, pressure, wind speed and direction. Soundings are typically conducted 
by releasing a balloon filled with hydrogen or helium with in strumentation attached that measures 
different properties as the balloon rises from the surface until it pops at very high altitudes (80-100 kft). 
72 
 
Stable layer: A layer of given thickness in the atmosphere where temperatures are constant with height 
or rise with height; this results in little to no vertical movement of the air and little to no 
turbulence/mixing. 
 
Storm Track  (sometimes reference d as the Jet Stream):  A zone of maximum storm propagation and 
development, usually concentrated in the mid-latitudes. 
 
Stratiform: Usually used in reference to precipitation, this implies a large area of precipitation that has a 
fairly uniform intensity except where influenced by terrain, etc.   It is the result of larger -scale (synoptic 
scale) weather processes, as opposed to convective processes. 
 
Sublimation: The phase change in which water in solid form (ice) turns directly into water vapor.  The 
opposite process is deposition. 
 
Subsidence: The process of a given air mass moving downward in elevation, such as often occurs on the 
downwind side of a mountain range. 
 
Subtropical/subtropics: Referring to the region of the Earth bordering on the tropics, from the Tropic of 
Cancer/Capricorn (23.5°N/S) to about 35°N/S. Subtropical moisture  would refer to moisture whose 
source region is the subtropics. Subtropical Jet Stream would refer to a jet stream within the subtropics. 
 
Supercooled: Liquid water (such as tiny cloud droplets) occurring at temperatures below the freezing 
point (32°F or 0°C). 
 
Synoptic Scale: A scale of hundreds to perhaps 1,000+ miles, the size scale at which high and low pressure 
systems develop. 
 
Trough (or low pressure system):  Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather.  
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic 
(counterclockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere.  
 
Trough axis: The longitude band corresponding to the low point of a trough. 
 
Unstable air mass: an air mass wherein a perturbation (wave) increases in magnitude over time. A parcel 
of air displaced upward in an unstable airmass will continue to rise until it reaches equilibrium. Regions 
where, if moisture is sufficient, convection can develop if a mechanism (e.g., heating, frontal boundary) is 
present to initiate lift. 
 
Upper level: The region of the atmosphere above 20 kft and below the tropopause (approx. 60-80 kft). 
 
Upper-Level Jet or Jet Stream  (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track):  A region of 
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track 
in the mid-latitudes.  This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-latitude 
synoptic-scale storm development. 
 
Upper level low/trough/disturbance: an area of low pressure located at higher altitudes, e.g., at 700 mb 
/ 10,000 feet MSL or 500 mb / 18,000 feet MSL. 
73 
 
UTC (or GMT, or Z) time:  Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at 
Greenwich, England.   Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7 
hours. 
 
Vector: Term used to represent wind velocity (speed + direction) at a given point. 
 
Velocity: Describes speed of an object, often used in the description of wind intensities. 
 
Vertical Wind Profiler:  Ground-based system that measures wind velocity at various levels above the 
radar site. 
 
Wave clouds: Clouds that form on the rising branches of mountain waves created within a stable airmass 
in strong flow downwind of mountains. On satellite imagery, they appear as spaced bands of clouds 
parallel to and downwind of the mountain barrier. 
 