 
Annual Cloud Seeding Report 
Western Uintas Program 
2023-2024 Winter Season 
 
Prepared For: 
Weber Basin Water Conservancy District 
Central Utah Water Conservancy District 
Provo River Water Users Association 
State of Utah, Division of Water Resources 
 
Prepared By: 
David Yorty 
North American Weather Consultants, Inc. 
8180 S. Highland Dr., Suite B-2 
Sandy, Utah 84093 
 
July 2024  

1 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
CLOUD SEEDING OVERVIEW ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............2 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................4 
PROGRAM HISTORY ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 4 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 6 
2. PROGRAM DESIGN ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 7 
2.1 BACKGROUND ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................7 
2.2 SEEDING CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ ................7 
2.3 EQUIPMENT AND PROJECT SET UP ................................ ................................ ........................... 7 
2.4 SUSPENSION CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 10 
3. WEATHER DATA AND MODELS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 11 
4. OPERATIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  16 
4.1 OPERATIONAL SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 20 
5. ASSESSMENT OF SEEDING EFFECTS ................................ ................................ ..............................  32 
5.1 BACKGROUND ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 32 
5.2 CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF TARGET/CONTROL EVALUATIONS ................................ .. 33 
5.3 EVALUATION OF SNOW WATER CONTENT ................................ ................................ ................ 33 
APPENDIX A SUSPENSION CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 41 
APPENDIX B SEEDING OPERATIONS TABLES ................................ ................................ ...................... 44 
APPENDIX C GLOSSARY ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 47 
  
2 
 
CLOUD SEEDING OVERVIEW 
The Science 
The cloud -seeding process aids precipitation formation by 
enhancing ice crystal production in clouds. When the ice crystals 
grow sufficiently, they become snowflakes and fall to the 
ground.  
Silver iodide has been selected for its environmental safety and 
superior efficiency in producing ice in clouds. Silver iodide adds 
microscopic particles with a structural similarity to natural ice 
crystals. Ground-based and aircraft -borne technologies can  be 
used to add the particles to the clouds. 
Safety 
Research has clearly documented that cloud seeding with silver-
iodide aerosols shows no environmentally harmful effect. Iodine 
is a component of many necessary amino acids. Silver is both 
quite inert and naturally occurring, the amounts released are far 
less than background silver already present in unseeded areas. 
Effectiveness 
Numerous studies performed by universities, professional 
research organizations, private utility companies and weather 
modification providers have conclusively demonstrated the 
ability for Silver Iodide to augment precipitation under the 
proper atmospheric conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
3 
 
CLIMATE TRENDS 
Every ten years, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA) releases a summary of various 
U.S. weather conditions for the past three decades to determine average values for a variety of conditions, 
including, temperature and precipitation.  This is known as the U.S Climate normal, with a 30-year average.  
These 30-year normal values can help to determine a departure from historic norms and identify current 
weather trends.  The current 30-year average is based on the period of 1990 – 2020.  Images in Figures 1 
and 2 show how each 30 -year average for the past 120 years compares to the composite 20 th century 
average for temperature and precipitation.  For the western U.S., the 1990 -2020 average show much 
warmer than average temperatures, in comparison to the 100 -year 20 th century average.  When 
comparing precipitation for the past 30 years to both the previous 30 -year average and the 1901 -2000 
average, the American Southwest (including portions of Utah, Arizona, California and Nevada) has seen 
as much as a 10% decrease in average annual precipitation.  
 
Figure 1 U.S. Annual Temperature compared to 20th-Century Average 
 
Figure 2 U.S. Annual Precipitation compared to 20th-Century Average 

4 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Program History 
A total of 27 winter seasons of cloud seeding have been conducted in portions of the Western Uinta Range 
in Utah.  The Western Uintas program utilizes 11 ground -based, manually operated  (Cloud Nuclei 
Generator, or CNG) sites, containing a 2% silver iodide solution. The goal of the seeding program is to 
augment wintertime snowpack/precipitation over the seeded watersheds. The areas targeted for seeding 
have included the upper portions of both the Weber River and the Provo River drainages in most years.   
Precipitation and snowfall were again above normal during the 2023-2024 winter season, with snow water 
equivalent for the Weber-Ogden River Basin averaging about 133% of the median value on April 1st.  The 
water year precipitation through April 1 st averaged 123% of the normal median value across the basin.  
The Provo River basin had corresponding April 1 st averages of 135% of median snowpack and 126% of 
median precipitation.   
A total of 1592.25 seeding hours were conducted during 31 storm periods this season, out of a maximum 
budgeted 2250 hours. Although the seeding program has normally been conducted during the months of 
December – March, additional program sponsorship by the Jordan Valley Water Conservancy District this 
season resulted in an extension  of the Western Uintas program through the month of April , with 
additional budgeted seeding hours compared to the original 1500. 
Results 
To evaluate the increase in snowpack and precipitation resulting from cloud seeding , long term 
target/control evaluations have been performed for the Western Uintas program. These studies use linear 
and multiple linear regressions to compare seasonal performance in seeded areas vs non -seeded areas. 
The results of these evaluations, for the past 24 years, point to an average increase of 3% to 6% in April 
1st snowpack (as measured by liquid water equivalence) resulting from cloud seeding. This equates to 
an average increase in runoff of roughly 25,000 acre-feet in the target areas. The relationship between 
snowpack and realized streamflow is generally not linear (improved efficiency at higher runoff rates). 
Additional evaluations were, therefore, conducted to determine the projected increase in runoff resulting 
from a 5% increase in snowpack  (a rough  average result taken  from the target/co ntrol evaluations) . 
Resulting streamflow increases ranging from about 6 -10% were indicated by these evaluations. Section 
5.5 of the report contains further discussion of these mathematical analyses. 
Recommendations  
It is recommended that the winter seeding program for the Western Uintas target area be continued.  
Routine application of weather modification technology each year can help stabilize and bolster water 
supplies (both surface and underground storage).  Commitment to conduct a program each winter 
5 
 
provides stability and acceptance by funding agencies and the general public.  The program is designed so 
that it can be temporarily suspended or terminated during a given winter season. 
  
  
6 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Due to high natural precipitation variability and the increasing demand for water, cloud seeding has been 
conducted in some parts of Utah for over 45 years, helping to augment water supplies.  Cloud seeding in 
Utah is regulated by the Utah Department of Natural Resources through the Division of Water Resources.   
After complying with various permit requirements, NAWC was granted a license and permit to  conduct 
cloud seeding for the Western Uintas program watersheds. A cloud seeding program has continued over 
recent winter seasons up to the present time for the Upper Weber and Provo River Basins.  Cloud seeding 
programs have been conducted in this area by North American Weather Consultants dating back to 1989. 
These programs have often been jointly sponsored by two agencies: the Provo River Water Users 
Association and the Weber Basin Water Conservancy District. 
The Weber Basin Water Conservancy District’s participation has been continuous since the project’s 
inception while the Provo River Water Users Association opted out during water years 2006 to 2012.  The 
Provo River Water Users Association rejoined the prog ram for the 2012-13 season through the present. 
Eleven ground -based silver iodide cloud nuclei generators (CNGs) were installed for the 202 2-2023 
season’s program.  The Western Uintas program became operational on December 1, 2023 and ended on 
April 30, 20 24. The program was originally contracted to end on March 3 1, 2024. However, additional 
program sponsorship by the Jordan Valley Water Conservancy District resulted in an extension  of the 
Western Uintas program through the month of April, with additional budgeted seeding hours that raised 
the total to a maximum of 2,250 . This report provides information about the operational cloud seeding 
and results of statistical analyses toward estimations of cloud seeding effects. Section 2 describes the 
seeding project design and provides maps of the seeded target areas, as well as the locations of the CNGs 
with which the seeding was conducted.  Section 3 discusses the types of real -time and forecast 
meteorological data that are used for conduct of the seeding programs. Section 4 summarizes the seeding 
operations conducted during this past season.  Section 5 details statistical evaluations of the effects of the 
cloud seeding program.   
  
7 
 
2. PROGRAM DESIGN 
2.1 Background 
The operational procedures utilized for this cloud seeding project are essentially the same as those that 
have been proven to be effective for over 4 5 years of wintertime cloud seeding in the mountainous 
regions of Utah.  The results from these operational seeding efforts have consistently indicated long-term 
average increases in wintertime precipitation and snow water content during the periods in which cloud 
seeding was conducted.  These estimated increases have generally ranged from 5 to 10 percent  (for the 
majority of seeded areas) in excess of what would have been expected without seeding, as predicted by 
historical linear regression target/control analyses. 
2.2 Seeding Criteria 
Project operations have utilized a selective seeding approach, which has proven to be the most efficient 
and cost-effective method, and has provided the most beneficial results.  Selective seeding, or seeding 
only of storms or portions of storms in which precipitation has a reasonable chance of being enhanced, is 
based on several criteria which determine the seedability of the winter storms. These criteria deal with 
key characteristics of the air mass (temperature, thermodynamic stability, wind flow and moi sture 
content), both in and below the precipitating clouds. The following list includes some of the key 
meteorological conditions that generally qualify an event for cloud seeding. 
• Cloud bases are below the mountain barrier crest. 
• Low-level wind directions and speeds would favor the movement of the silver iodide 
particles from their release points into the intended target area. 
• No low-level atmospheric inversions or stable layers that would restrict the upward vertical 
transport of the silver iodide particles from the surface to at least the -5°C (23°F) level or 
colder. 
• Temperature at mountain barrier crest height expected to be -5°C (23°F) or colder. 
• Temperature at the 700mb level (approximately 10,000 feet) expected to be warmer than -
15°C (5°F). 
2.3 Equipment and Project Set Up 
In the fall of 202 3 NAWC reinstalled ground -based cloud seeding equipment for the winter seeding 
program.  The equipment is placed at carefully selected sites, to provide seeding plumes that would be 
effective in enhancing snowfall over the project target area.  Climatological winter storm behavior and 
prevailing wind direction are major factors in the placement of these sites .  Eleven seeding sites were 
installed for this year’s seeding program, whose locations are shown in Figure 2.1.  Occasionally, seeding 
sites installed for other seeding programs in the region (such as the nearby High Uintas program) are used 
to target the Western Uintas program during less commonly occurring wind flow situations.   Also, there 
are a number of automated sites that have been install as part of a state -sponsored seeding program.  
8 
 
While these are budgeted separately, they can provide an added benefit to the program in certain 
situations.  
 
Figure 2.1  Western Uintas target area (purple) and ground -based cloud seeding site locations (blue pins).  
Yellow pins are automated sites that can potentially seed the Western Uintas.    
Ground-Based Manual Seeding Sites 
The cloud seeding equipment at each site consists of a cloud nuclei generator (CNG) unit and a propane 
gas supply (Figure 2.2).  The seeding solution, emitted via combustion, consists of two percent by weight 
silver iodide (AgI), complexed with small portions of sodium iodide and para-dichlorobenzene in solution 
with acetone. 
The CNG is manually operated by igniting the propane flame (at the flame head in a burn chamber) and 
adjusting the flow of seeding solution through a flow rate meter.  The propane gas also pressurizes the 

9 
 
solution tank, which allows the solution to be sprayed into the CNG’s burn chamber at a regulated rate, 
where microscopic (sub -micron)-sized silver iodide crystals are formed.  The crystals, which closely 
resemble natural ice crystals in structure, are released at a rate of 8 grams per hour per generator when 
using the 2% solution.  These crystals become active as artificial ice nuclei in -cloud at temperatures 
between -5°C (23°F) and -10°C (14°F).    
It is necessary that the AgI crystals become active in the formation zone (the region in the cloud which 
contains supercooled liquid water) upwind of, or over the project area mountain crest.  This allows the 
available supercooled liquid water to be effectively converted to ice crystals which grow to snowflake size 
and precipitate onto the mountain barrier within the intended area of effect.  If the AgI crystals take too 
long to become active, or if the temperature upwind of the crest is too warm, the seeding plume will pass 
from the generator through the precipitation formation zone and over the mountain crest without 
producing any additional snowfall at the surface.  It is the meteorologist’s task to identify storm situations 
in which the seeding treatment can be effective. 
 
 
Figure 2.2    Manually operated cloud seeding equipment 
Manual c loud seeding equipment was sited at 11 locations (mostly in the valleys), ranging from the 
southwest to northwest sides of the target area, as shown in Figure 2.1. Pertinent CNG site information is 

10 
 
provided in Table 2-1.  Most of the winter storms that affect the northern Utah Mountains are associated 
with synoptic weather systems that move into Utah from the northwest, west or southwest.  Usually, they 
consist of a frontal system and/or an upper trough with the winds preceding the front or trough blowing 
from the south or southwest.  As each system passes through the area, the wind flow changes to the west, 
northwest, or north.   Clouds and precipitation may precede as well as follow the front/trough  passage, 
or they may occur primarily after the passage along the boundary of the colder air mass that moves into 
the region.  For the region comprising the project target area, the most abundant precipitation and low -
mid level moisture usually occurs in w est to northwest flow patterns.  This is when the best seeding 
opportunities typically occur. Southwesterly flow is generally associated with somewhat warmer 
conditions that are sometimes less seedable. 
Table 2-1 
Manually Operated Cloud Seeding Sites 
Site ID Site Name Elev (Ft) Lat (N) Long (W) 
WU-2 Croyden 5371 41° 04.12' 111° 30.83' 
WU-3 Coalville 5587 40° 55.95' 111° 20.72' 
WU-4 Pineview 6407 40° 56.39' 111° 10.18' 
WU-5 Peoa 6148 40° 43.75' 111° 20.61' 
WU-6 Oakley 6472 40° 43.07' 111° 18.00' 
WU-7 Kamas West 6872 40° 38.16' 111° 19.33' 
WU-8 Kamas 6489 40° 38.43' 111° 16.77' 
WU-9 Woodland 6706 40° 34.89' 111° 13.81' 
WU-10 Woodland East 7305 40° 33.35' 111° 06.80' 
WU-11 Midway 5570 40° 30.59' 111° 28.64' 
WU-12 Heber City 5810 40° 29.73' 111° 22.52' 
2.4 Suspension Criteria 
NAWC always conducts its projects within guidelines adopted to ensure public safety. Accordingly, NAWC 
has a standing policy and project -specific procedures for the suspension of cloud seeding operations in 
certain situations. Those criteria are shown in Appendix A and have recently been updated in coordination 
with the Utah Division of Water Resources. The criteria are an integral part of the seeding program.  There 
were no seeding suspensions during the 2023-24 season.  
  
11 
 
3. WEATHER DATA AND MODELS  
NAWC meteorologists acquire weather information online from a wide variety of freely available and 
subscriber services.  This information includes weather forecast model data, surface observations, 
rawinsonde (weather balloon) upper -air observations, satellite images, NEXRAD radar information, and 
weather cameras.  This information helps NAWC’s meteorologists to determine when conditions are 
appropriate for cloud seeding.  NAWC’s meteorologists are able to access all meteorological products 
from their homes, allowing continued monitoring and conduct of seeding operations outside of regular 
business hours. 
Figures 3.1 – 3.3 show examples of some of the available weather information that was used in this 
decision-making process.  Figure 3.4 displays predictions of ground-based seeding plume dispersion for a 
discrete storm period in the Western Uintas Program from the 202 3-2024 season using the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s HYSPLIT model. This model helps to estimate the horizontal 
and vertical spread of a plume from potential ground-based seeding sites based on wind fields contained 
in the weather forecast models. 
Global and regional forecast models are the basis of most modern weather forecasts, and important tools 
for operational meteorologists.  These models forecast a variety of parameters at different levels of the 
atmosphere, including winds, temperatures, moisture, and surface parameters such as accumulated 
precipitation.  An example of a display from the global GFS forecast model for a storm event during the 
2023-2024 season is shown in Figure 3.5. 
 
12 
 
 
Figure 3.1 Visible spectrum  satellite image of  Utah during the afternoon  of December 7, 202 3 during a 
seeded event. 
 
Figure 3.2 Weather radar image over northern Utah on the morning of December 7, 2023.  

13 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3 Map of surface temperatures and wind on the morning of January 14, 2024  

14 
 
 
Figure 3.4 HYSPLIT plume dispersion forecast for potential seeding site locations on the evening of 
December 7, 2023 

15 
 
 
Figures 3.5 GFS (Global Forecast Systems) 4-Panel model plot during storm event on the night of January 14, 
2024 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
4. OPERATIONS 
The 2023-2024 Western Uintas cloud seeding program for the Weber and Provo River basins began on 
December 1, 2023, and ended April 30, 2024 (extended through April with sponsorship from the Jordan 
Valley Water Conservancy District).  The program was originally contracted to end on March 30  prior to 
the additional sponsorship. A total of 31 storm periods were seeded during all or portions of 41 days.  Four 
storms were seeded in December, seven in January, eight in February, eight in March and four in April.  A 
total of 1592.25 seeding generator hours were conducted this season. Table 4 -1 shows the dates and 
ground generator usage for the storm events, and Appendix B contains more detailed site usage data. 
Figure 4.1 shows the usage of generator hours during the season. 
Precipitation and snowfall were again above normal during the 2023-2024 winter season, with snow water 
equivalent for the Weber-Ogden River basin averaging about 133% of the median value on April 1.  The 
water year precipitation through April 1 averaged 123% of the normal (medium value) across the basin.  
The Provo River basin had corresponding April 1  averages of 135% of median snowpack and 126% of 
medium precipitation. Figures 4.2 to 4.4 are seasonal graphs for some SNOTEL sites in the target area.      
 
  
Figure 4.1 Seeding during the 202 3-2024 season (red), in comparison to a linear usage of total budgeted 
hours through the season (diagonal line). 
 

17 
 
Table 4-1 
Storm dates and number of sites/hours used, 2023-2024 season. 
Storm No. Date(s) # Sites Used # Hours 
1 December 2-3 5 95.5 
2 December 7 2 13 
3 December 7-8 9 127.5 
4 December 23 9 62 
5 January 9-10 4 53.5 
6 January 10 8 29 
7 January 13-15 8 172 
8 January 17 2 10.25 
9 January 17-18 2 22.25 
10 January 21 1 4 
11 January 25 6 55.25 
12 February 2-3 8 123.25 
13 February 6-7 7 73.25 
14 February 9 4 28.5 
15 February 15 4 20.75 
16 February 16 6 27.25 
17 February 18 6 25 
18 February 20-21 7 99.25 
19 February 26-27 4 63 
20 March 2 9 45.25 
21 March 7 7 52.75 
22 March 12-13 10 68 
23 March 23 7 28.25 
24 March 24 2 8.75 
25 March 25 4 23.75 
26 March 26 7 60 
27 March 28 8 35.5 
28 April 6 4 31 
29 April 15-16 6 90.75 
30 April 26-27 1 20 
31 April 29 5 23.75 
Season Total --- --- 1592.25 
 
 
18 
 
 
Figure 4.2 NRCS SNOTEL snow water content plot for October 1, 2023 through May 23, 2024 for the Trial 
Lake, UT SNOTEL Site. Black line is the 2023-24 season data. Green represents the median, while 
purple and red are the historical max and min values respectively. 

19 
 
 
Figure 4.3     NRCS SNOTEL snow water content plot for October 1, 2023 through May 23, 2024 for Chalk Creek 
#1, UT SNOTEL site. Black line is the 2023-24 season data. Green represents the median, while 
purple and red are the historical max and min values respectively. 

 
20 
 
 
 
Figure 4.4    NRCS SNOTEL snow water content plot for October 1 , 2023 through May 30, 2024 for the Smith 
and Morehouse, UT SNOTEL site.  Black line is the 202 3-24 season data. Green represents the 
median, while purple and red are the historical max and min values respectively.   
In operational practice, the project meteorologist, with the aid of continually updated online weather 
information, monitored each approaching storm.  If the storm parameters met the seedability criteria 
presented in Table 2-1, and if no seeding curtailments or suspensions were in effect, an appropriate array 
of seeding generators was ignited and then adjusted as evolving conditions required.  Seeding continued 
as long as conditions were favorable and precipitating clouds remained over the target area.  The 
operation of the seeding sites is not a simple “all -or-nothing” situation. Individual seeding sites are 
selected and run based on their location, and targeting considerations based on storm attributes. 
4.1 Operational Summary 
A brief synopsis of seeded (or otherwise significant) storm events during the operational seeding period 
is provided below. All times are local (MST/MDT) unless otherwise noted. References to wind direction in 
meteorology correspond to the direction that the wind is coming from (the upwind direction).  The 700 
mb level (~9,500 feet above sea level during the winter) temperature in the atmosphere is often 
referenced, given that the temperature near mountain crest height is an important consideration for 
cloud seeding. 
 
 
 
 

 
21 
 
December 2023 
December produced below normal precipitaiton and snowpack across the area  (Figure 4.5), with a dry 
start to the season.  In fact, at the end of 2023 many SNOTEL sites were close to the climatological 
minimum values in the Uintas region.  There were four seeding opportunities for the Western Uintas 
program in December. 
A westerly wind pattern on December 2 -3 was accompanied by gradually warming temperatures, from 
about -8 to -6 C at the 700 mb level.   Moisture increase d and conditions became favorable for seeding 
for higher elevation portions of the target area on the night of December 2.  Snowfall and seeding 
continued for much of the day on December 3, and, although precipitation amounts were decent, seeding 
conditions were only fair as a higher cloud deck was producing most of the snowfall.  Seeding ended by 
mid-afternoon with storm precipitation totals ranging from about 0.9 - 1.7 inches of snow water content 
at target area SNOTEL sites.  
A couple of fast -moving shortwave frontal systems produced seeding opportunities on December 7 -8, 
with first with a frontal passage on the 7th.  The 700 mb temperature dropped to around -8 C behind the 
front with only some light snow showers and seeding during the morning to early afternoon.  After a 
break, another system spread snow into the area on the night of December 7-8.  Seeding began in westerly 
flow overnight, with winds becoming northwesterly and the temperature dropping further to around -12 
C at 700 mb on December 8.  A good orographic and somewhat convective snowfall pattern was observed 
on the morning of the 8th, but by mid-afternoon the clouds became quite icy in appearance with a lack of 
liquid water and seeding was terminated at that point.  Precipitation totals, mainly with the second of 
these systems, exceeded a half inch of water content in northern portion of the target area, but amounts 
were light (near 0.1 inch) over southern portions.  
After a period of dry weather with some valley temperature inversions, a frontal snow band moved into 
northern Utah on December 23.  Seeding was initiated in the morning and the 700 mb temperature 
dropped from about -5 to -12 C during the day.  Snow shower s decreased during the afternoon hours 
following the main band, with snow and seeding activity ending by late afternoon.  Precipitation with this 
system was light in the WU target area, with about 0.1 – 0.2 inches of water content.  
 
 
 
22 
 
 
Figure 4.5 December 2023 precipitation, percent of normal 
 
 

 
23 
 
January 2024 
After a very dry start to the season, with weather pattern changed in January and brought much more 
frequent storm events to the region.  Precipitation and snowfall ended up being substantially above 
average in January (Figure 4.6), which began a recovery from the low early season snowpack.  The Western 
Uintas had 7 seeding storm periods in January.   
After some weak and disorganized systems that did not prove favorable for seeding during the first week 
or so of January, a strong and fast-moving cold front arrived on January 9.  Although temperatures were 
on the cold side, falling to near -15 C at 700 m b with the frontal passage, the front produced a zone of 
strong lift with a fairly intense snow squall that arrived in the area just after sunset.  Seeding began during 
the early evening, and continued overnight at some sites with additional snow shower ac tivity.  
Precipitation totals with this frontal passage amounted to about 0.5 – 0.8 inches of water content in the 
WU target area. 
A frontal system brought additional periods of snowfall on the afternoon and evening of January 10.  
Temperatures warmed somewhat (to around -12 C at 700 mb) during the afternoon, but then fall back to 
below -15 C on the night of January 10 behind a cold front.  Seeding was conducted for a short time period 
during the late afternoon to early evening when conditions appeared favorable with at least some 
embedded liquid water in the clouds.  Precipitation totals amount to about 0.2 – 0.6 inches of snow water 
content.  
A moist system moved onshore into Oregon and northern California on January 13, with moisture and 
southerly flow increasing although with an initially cold air mass over Utah.  Limited seeding began on the 
night of January 13, with better lower level mixin g and more moisture on January 14 as winds became 
northwesterly.  More widespread seeding was conducted on the 14th, with 700 mb temperatures around 
-8 C during that time period. Snowfall and seeding continued overnight, ending the morning of January 
15.  Precipitation totals ranged from about 0.8 – 1.7 inches of water content with this system during about 
a 36 to 48-hour period.   
A couple of weak systems brought some snowfall on January 17-18, with seeding initially conducted during 
a frontal snowfall band during the late morning to early afternoon of the 17 th.  The 700 mb temperature 
was near -6 C during that period.  After a break in activity, another short wave trough brought additional 
light snowfall with similar temperature on the night of January 17-18.  Seeding was again conducted at a 
few sites in a wes terly wind pattern.  Precipitation amounts during this period in general were between 
about 0.5 – 1.0 inches of water content, with the majority of this during the initial snowfall period midday 
on the 17th.   
 
24 
 
 
Figure 4.6  January 2024 precipitation, percent of normal 
A weak system provided a very limited seeding opportunity during the late afternoon to early evening of 
January 21, with some light showers occurring and a 700 mb temperature near -5 C.  Precipitation totals 
were around  0.1 – 0.2 inches of water content.  

 
25 
 
A trough extended from Oregon into the northern Great Basin on January 25, and brought some increasing 
moisture and snow shower activity.  Seeding was conducted in the afternoon to early evening with the 
700 mb temperature dropping to around -8 C.  Precipitation amounts of 0.2 – 0.5 inches of water content 
were observed at target area SNOTEL sites.  
 
February 2024 
February was an active weather month that brought up to twice the normal monthly snowfall to portions 
of the Uintas (Figure 4.7), and a consistently active weather pattern through the month.  Snowpack values 
improved into the normal seasonal range from their low beginning, and there were 8 se eded storm 
periods in February.  
Widespread, light precipitation on February 2 was associated with a fairly warm air mass and precipitation 
from a higher cloud deck initially.  The passage of the trough axis through the area resulted in 
northwesterly winds by night of February 2-3 and cooling, with the 700 mb temperature falling to around 
-8 C.  Snow and seeding ended on the morning of February 3, with precipitation totals from the storm 
period in general between about 0.5 – 1.0 inches of water content in the WU target area. 
A large trough near the California coast brought a significant subtropical moisture plume into Utah on 
February 5 -6.  Initially, temperatures were warm and lower levels somewhat dry with unfavorable 
conditions for seeding.  Rain and snow increased on the 6th with south to southwest winds and a 700 mb 
temperature near -3 C.  Temperature remained fairly warm with lower levels winds mostly southeasterly 
even into the night of February 6, with very limited seeding opportunity.  On February 7, the core region 
of the complex trough moved had moved inland and was crossing Utah and Arizona.  Temperatures cooled 
somewhat (near -6 C at 700 mb) with better mixing and widespread precipitaiton at times, although 
seeding was mainly targeted to the higher (southern) half of the WU area.  Seeding was conducted 
through most of the day, ending in the ev ening, with precipitation totals from this event as a whole 
ranging from about 0.7 - 1.7 inches in the WU target area.  
A fairly weak trough moved across the area on February 15, although temperatures and winds were 
generally suitable for seeding operations. A band of precipitation in the morning was followed by a few 
convective snow showers in the afternoon.  Precipitation  totals were somewhat variable, ranging from 
about 0.2 – 0.7 inches at target area SNOTEL sites.  
 
26 
 
 
 
Figure 4.7  February 2024 precipitation, percent of normal 
 
With a trough over the Pacific Northwest, a frontal boundary approached from the north on February 16 
with moisture mostly along and south of it, and some arctic air to the north and east of Utah.  Some snow 
squalls during the afternoon and evening were se eded, ending on the night of the 16 th with the 700 mb 

 
27 
 
temperature dropping to around -10 C as activity waned.  Precipitation totals were relatively light, around 
0.2 – 0.4 inches of water content.  
A weak trough crossed Idaho on far northern Utah on February 18, although the air mass over Utah was 
relatively moist and generated a good deal of snow shower activity during the daytime hours. Winds 
shifted from the southwest to northwest with a frontal passage, with fairly low cloud bases and a 700 mb 
temperature from about -5 to -7 C.  Seeding was conducted from midday through the afternoon hours, 
and precipitation totals ranged from about 0.2 – 0.5 inches of water content. 
A band of rain and snow set up across the area on the night of February 20 -21 along a weak frontal 
boundary, with a 700 mb temperature near -5 C.  Lower levels winds remained very light, making targeting 
somewhat of a challenge.  Snow showers continued in light southwesterly flow through much of the 21st, 
with a 700 mb temperature near -6 C being favorable for seeding to continue through the afternoon hours. 
Seeding ended on the evening of the 21st as conditions began to dry out.  Due to the fairly long residence 
of the precipitation band over the area, substantial totals were realized over portions of the WU target 
with totals ranging between about 0.7 – 2.3 inches of water equivalent at SNOTEL sites.  
A large, cold trough moved into the northwestern U.S. on February 26.  A large cold front crossed northern 
Utah on the evening and night of the 26th, bringing temperatures down near -4 C to the -16 to -18 C range 
behind it on the 27 th.  The overnight frontal snow band was seeded from several sites, with seeding 
continuing through midday on the 27 th as some convective snow showers developed.  However, these 
were generally lacking in liquid water content due to cold temperatures and seeding ended shortly afte r 
midday.  Precipitation totals at target area SNOTEL sites ranged from 0.3 – 0.8 inches with this storm 
event.  
 
March 2024 
The month of March was an active weather month with significantly above normal precipitation over most 
of the region, although totals were quite variable around the Uintas (Figure 4.8).  There were eight seeded 
storm periods for the WU program in March. 
 
28 
 
 
Figure 4.8  March 2024 precipitation, percent of normal 
A large and very cold trough moved onshore into the northwestern U.S. on March 2 -3, bringing a strong 
cold front across northern portions of Utah on the afternoon to early evening of March 2.  Winds were 
very strong along and ahead of the front, and temperatures dropped from about -4 C at 700 mb ahead of 
the front to -13 C behind it.  Seeding was conducted for several hours during the late afternoon and early 
evening with the frontal passage, ending later in the evening as conditions dried out behind it.  There was 

 
29 
 
some additional snow shower activity on March 3-4 with the trough over the region, but the air mass was 
cold and lacking in liquid water so no additional seeding was conducted with this system.  SNOTEL data 
indicated water content amounts in the 0.5 – 0.9 inch range with the seeded frontal passage on March 2. 
A disorganized trough included a closed low centered near far southern Nevada on the morning of March 
7.  Some convective precipitation developed over portions of Utah including the Western Uintas beginning 
early in the day.  Cloud bases were fairly low at  times, ranging from about 6,000 to 8,000 feet and the 
atmosphere was suitably cold with a 700 mb temperature near -7 C.  Winds were west – northwesterly 
and snow showers continued during the daytime hours. Seeding was conducted from nearly all site, 
ending around sunset.  Precipitation totals were around 0.2 – 0.3 inches of water content.  
A cold trough moved onshore in the Pacific Northwest on March 12, with a cold front and associated 
snowfall band moving into the WU area during the evening hours.  Seeding began in the early evening and 
continued overnight at some sites, with the 700 mb temperature falling between about -5 to -10 C during 
the frontal passage and overnight.  Snow showers lingered during much of the day on March 13 in 
northwesterly flow and seeding continued at some sites, ending before sunset.  Precipitation totals ranged 
from about 0.4 – 0.8 inches of water content from this system.   
A large trough centered near Oregon pushed a cold front boundary into the Great Basin on March 23, 
reaching the Uintas area during the evening hours.  The 700 mb temperature dropped to below -5 C with 
the front, and there was embedded convection as well.  The event was short-lived, however, with seeding 
for only several hours ending late in the evening.  Precipitation amounts ranged from about 0.4 – 0.8 
inches of water content at SNOTEL sites in the target area. 
A large trough remained over much of the western U.S. during the March 24-26 period, with a cold, moist 
northwesterly wind pattern over Utah and mostly diurnally driven convective showers each day.  A few 
thundershowers also developed at times, and many of the showers contained graupel which is indicative 
of good liquid water content.  The 700 mb temperature ranged from about -8 to -10 C during this time 
period.  Seeding was conducted during the daytime hours on each of these three days.  Precipitation totals 
were somewhat light and scattered, with about 0.1 – 0.2” recorded at SNOTEL sites in the WU target each 
day on March 24 and 25 and somewhat higher totals (0.2 – 0.5 inches) on March 26. 
Yet another large and cold trough brought a frontal passage to the area on the afternoon/evening of 
March 28, with seeding conducted for several hours from mid afternoon into the evening.  The 700 mb 
temperature dropped to around – 7 C with the frontal passage, and there was some embedded convection 
as well.  Snowfall and seeding operations ended later in the evening, and precipitation ranged from about 
0.3 – 0.8 inches of water content at SNOTEL sites. 
 
 
30 
 
April 2024 
Thanks to additional sponsorship of the seeding program by the Jordan Valley Water Conservancy District 
this season, extending the program through the month of April.  Although April was a drier than average 
month (Figure 4.9), this extension allowed the seeding of four storm periods in April. 
A large trough moved from California into Nevada on April 5, with snowfall over the western Uintas 
beginning on the evening and night of the 5 th.  While cloud types and wind patterns were not conducive 
to seeding initially, the trough core moved across the region on April 6 with convective snow showers and 
cold temperature.  The 700 mb temperature was near -11 C on April 6 with northwesterly winds , and 
seeding was conducted from late morning until about sunset. Precipitation total during this period were 
around 0.2 – 0.4 inches of water content.  
After a period of warm and dry weather, a trough affected Utah beginning on April 15 with convective 
showers developing in northwesterly flow.  These showers occurrred mainly during the afternoon and 
evening hours but persisted into the night, with a 700 mb temperature near -5 C.  Seeding began midday 
to the afternoon hours with more sites added in the evening as winds become north -northwesterly.  
Seeding operations ended early on April 16.  Precipitation totals with this system were in the 0.5 – 0.8 
inch range at target area SNOTEL sites. 
A large trough moved across the area on April 26-27, bringing areas of precipitation and a limited seeding 
opportunity.  Temperatures were on the warm side during much of the event and winds mostly 
unfavorable, being quite variable with easterly component flow during much of the event.  One available 
site within the seeding target area was used in this event, from midday on the 26th until the morning of 
the 27th.  Precipitation totals for the event as a whole ranged from about 0.5 – 1.0 inches of water content.  
The final seeded event of the season occurred on April 29, with a cold front bringing a band of snowfall 
and embedded thundershower activity across the area during the late afternoon and evening hours. 
Seeding was conducted during the late afternoon and evening hours and the 700 mb temperature cooled 
to near or below -5 C with the frontal passage.  There was fairly rapid drying behind the frontal passage 
and seeding operations ended late in the evening.  SNOTEL data showed water content ranging from 
about 0.2 – 0.5 inches in the target area with this event.  
 
 
31 
 
 
Figure 4.9  April 2024 precipitation, percent of normal   

 
32 
 
5. ASSESSMENT OF SEEDING EFFECTS 
5.1 Background 
The seemingly simple issue of determining the effects of cloud seeding has received considerable 
attention over the years. Evaluating the results of a cloud seeding program is often a rather difficult task, 
however, and the results, especially single-season indications, should be viewed with appropriate caution. 
The primary reason for the difficulty stems from the large natural variability in the amounts of 
precipitation that occur in a given area. The ability to detect a seeding effect becomes a function o f the 
size of the seeding increase relative to the natural variability in the precipitation pattern. Larger seeding 
effects can be detected more readily, and with a smaller number of seeded cases than are required to 
detect smaller increases. 
Historically, among all cloud seeding project types, the most consistent results have been observed in 
wintertime seeding programs in mountainous areas, with results indicating 5 -15 percent increases in 
seasonal precipitation. Establishing an accurate appr oximation of the effects of seeding within a single 
operational season can be challenging. To provide our clients with greater decision making power, NAWC 
had historically used a “target and control” regression to evaluate seeding impacts.  This involves 
comparison of a variable that is affected by seeding (precipitation or snowpack) between a “target” area 
(where seeding occurred for the season being assessed) and a “control” area (where no seeding occurred 
for the season being assessed).  
After identifying appropriate control sites, data for the selected variable (e.g., precipitation) is analyzed 
for both the “target” area and the “control” area for years where no seeding was performed in either 
area. A mathematical model (regression) is developed to determine the relationship between 
precipitation in the “target” area and precipitation in the “control” area under natural circumstances. This 
mathematical model is then used to analyze the selected variable in years where seeding did not occur in 
the “control” area but did occur in the “target” area. Using this model with data for the control sites, a 
reasonable prediction can be made of what would have transpired in the target area had no seeding 
occurred, then compare this to what actually happened in the target area. Consistent differences between 
the predicted and observed target area data may be attributed to cloud seeding effects, although with a 
low level of confidence until sufficient seeded season data is accumulated. 
This target and control technique works well where good mathematical correlation can be found between 
target and control area precipitation. Generally, the closer the two areas are geographically, and the more 
similar they are in terms of elevation and topography, the higher the correlation and the more certain the 
results. Areas selected that are too close together, however, can be subject to contamination of the 
control sites by seeding activities. This can result in an underestimate of the seeding effect . For 
precipitation and snowpack assessments, a correlation coefficient (r) of 0.90 or better would be 
considered excellent, and correlations around 0.85 would be very good. A correlation coefficient of 0.90 
 
33 
 
would indicate that over 80 percent of the variance (r 2) in the historical data set is explained by the 
regression equation used to estimate the subject variable (expected precipitation or snowpack) in the 
seeded years. Correlations less than about 0.80 are still acceptable, but it would likely take much longe r 
to attach any statistical significance to the apparent results of seeding. 
5.2 Considerations in the Development of Target/Control Evaluations 
With the advent of the Natural Resources Conservation Service's (NRCS) SNOTEL automated data 
acquisition system in the late 1970's, access to precipitation and snowpack (water equivalent) data in 
mountainous locations became routine. Before the automated system was developed, these data had to 
be acquired by having NRCS personnel visit the site to take necessary measurements. This is still done at 
some sites although most have been automated. Historically, Utah has had snowpack measurements 
taken at (usually) monthly intervals. Precipitation and snowpack data used in the analysis were obtained 
from the NRCS and/or from the National Climatic Data Center.  
 
Control sites are typically selected (from areas not affected by seeding)  with some geographic diversity, 
to help offset seasonal variations in weather patterns that may greatly affect specific locations. Another 
consideration in the selection of control sites for the development of an historical target/control 
relationship is one of data quality. A potential control site may be rejected due to poor data quality if the 
data significantly diverges over time from other sites in the area. SNOTEL sites, the type used in the 
evaluation of the Western Uintas program, typically have reliable long -term records with external 
variables (such as terrain aspect and surrounding vegetation) carefully selected or maintained.  
5.3 Evaluation of Snow Water Content 
Historically, the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) routinely measured the mountain snowpack at snow 
courses once or twice per month, usually starting in January and continuing until May or June. 
Measurements were made by visiting the snow course (commonly a  group of ten measurement points) 
and taking core samples of the snow to determine the water content and depth of the snow at each 
designated location along the course. Though this manual method is still being used at a few  sites, 
beginning in the 1980s, most of these sites (now known as SNOTEL) were automated. With the use of a 
snow pillow, the water equivalent of the snowpack can be determined remotely by reading the weight of 
the snow on the snow pillow. The water content within the snowpack is important since, after 
consideration of antecedent soil moisture  conditions, it ultimately determines how much water will be 
available as runoff when the snow melt occurs. Hydrologists routinely use snow water content to make 
forecasts of streamflow during the spring and early summer months. As with the precipitation s torage 
gauge and SNOTEL precipitation gauge networks, Utah also has access to an excellent snow course and 
SNOTEL snow pillow reporting system via the NRCS. Many of the same reporting mountain sites are 
configured with collocated precipitation and snowpack  measurements. Consequently, it was judged 
important to evaluate the effects of seeding on snowpack as well. 
 
34 
 
There are some potential pitfalls with snowpack measurements that must be recognized when using snow 
water content to evaluate seeding effectiveness. One problem that can occur is that not all winter storms 
are cold, and sometimes rain as well as snow falls in the mountains. This can lead to a disparity between 
precipitation totals (which measure everything that falls) and snowpack water content (which measures 
only the water held in the snowpack at a particular time). Also, warm periods can occur between 
snowstorms particularly in the spring season. If a significant warm period occurs, some of the precipitation 
that fell as snow may melt or sublimate by the time the next snow course measurement is made. This can 
also lead to a greater disparity between snow water content and precipitation at lower elevations (where 
more snow will melt in warm weather) than at higher elevations. 
April 1st snowpack readings are widely used for runoff forecasting since they usually closely represent the 
maximum snow accumulation for the winter season. Most streamflow and reservoir storage forecasts are 
made on the basis of the April 1 st snowpack data. For that reason, and because three to four months of 
seeding are generally represented in the April 1 st snowpack measurements, April 1st was selected as the 
date for snowpack analyses. 
Target/Control Sites and Regression Equation Development 
The procedure was essentially the same as what was done for the precipitation evaluation, e.g., control 
and target area sites were selected, and average values for each were determined. Seven target area snow 
measurement sites were utilized for the Western  Uintas Program, as shown in Figure 5.1. Table 5 -1 
provides the target area site names, elevations, and locations of these sites. The average elevation of the 
target sites is 8,637 feet MSL.  
 
 
35 
 
 
Figure 5.1  Western Uintas target area and snowpack target sites 
Table 5-1 
Target area snowpack sites 
Map Label Site Name Elev. (Ft) Lat. (N) Long. (W) 
1 Chalk Creek #2 8,200 40° 54' 111° 04' 
2 Chalk Creek #1 9,100 40° 51' 111° 04' 
3 Smith & Morehouse 7,600 40° 47' 111° 06' 
4 Redden Mine, Lower 8,500 40° 41' 111° 13' 
5 Hayden Fork 9,100 40° 48' 110° 53' 
6 Trial Lake 9,960 40° 41' 110° 57' 
7 Currant Creek 8,000 40° 21’ 111° 05’ 
 
The five control sites are located in southern Idaho, northeastern Nevada and central Utah as shown in 
Figure 5.2. Control area site names, elevations and locations are provided in Table 5 -2. The elevations of 
the control area sites average 6,887 feet (MSL). The non-seeded seasons were 1970-1988 and 1997-2000 
(a total of 23 seasons). Many more historical seasons were available for the snow water content 
analyses than for precipitation data, 23 versus 11 seasons. As a consequence, the snow water content 
analyses results are likely to be much more reliable than the precipitation analyses for this particular 
seeding program. 

 
36 
 
 
Figure 5.2  Western Uintas target area and snow control sites (squares) 
Table 5-2 
Control area snowpack sites 
Map Label Site Name Site ID Elev. (Ft) Lat. 
(N) Long. (W) 
A Badger Gulch SC, ID 14G03 6,660 42°06' 114°10' 
B Big Bend, NV 15H04S 6,700 41°46' 115°43' 
C Magic Mountain, ID 14G02S 6,880 42°11' 114°18' 
D Willow Flat SC, ID 11G04 6,070 42°08' 111°38' 
E Strawberry Divide, UT 11J08S 8,123 40°11' 111°13' 
 
  
The linear regression equation developed from the historical relationship between the average control 
snowpack data and the average target snowpack data for April 1st was the following: 
YC = 0.741 (XO) + 6.36 (4)    
where YC is the calculated average snow water content (inches) for the seven-station target and XO is the 
five-station control average observed snow water content for April 1st. 
Linear Regression Snowpack Analysis 
 
The combined (2 6-year) snow water linear regression evaluation for April 1 st, for the Western Uintas 
target sites, yields a ratio of 1.03. This long-term mean excludes water years 2004 and 2015 during which 
abnormal early snowmelt occurred, and thus includes 26 seeded seasons. The implied 3% increase based 
on the snowpack evaluation is equivalent to an average of about 0. 53 inches more water over the 
watersheds than might have occurred without the cloud seeding.  

 
37 
 
Multiple Linear Regression Snowpack Analysis 
A multiple linear regression analysis has been conducted for snowpack, and exhibits much lower seasonal 
variability in the indicated observed/predicted ratios than does the corresponding linear regression. The 
r value is also much better than for the stand ard linear regression (0.90 vs. 0.79). This implies less 
background noise in this equation, and thus likely more reliable estimates of the true seeding effects. The 
results of the multiple regression snowpack analyses suggest about a 6% increase over the long term . In 
the case of the Western Uintas evaluations, the multiple linear snowpack analysis is by far the strongest 
mathematically and is likely the most reliable for evaluation of this program.  
A double ratio analysis using snowpack data (similar to that for precipitation) resulted in a ratio of 1.13, 
implying a 13% increase in the target area (relative to the control) during the seeded seasons. However, 
this result is a high outlier in these evaluations and may not be representative of the actual seeding effects. 
NAWC’s best estimate of seeding effects for the Western Uintas program is about a 6% increase, as 
obtained in the multiple linear regression snowpack analysis. 
 
38 
 
 
5.4 Summary of Snow and Precipitation Evaluation Results 
The April 1 st snowpack analyses for 2 6 seeded seasons (2004 and 2015 were excluded) yield 
observed/predicted ratios of 1.03 (linear) and 1.06 (multiple linear). The results using April 1st snowpack 
imply average increases of roughly 3% -6%, which seems reasonable for this program, particularly in 
comparison to results of similar programs in the western U.S. and nearby programs in Utah. The April  1st 
snowpack evaluations are considered much more representative than the December-March precipitation 
evaluation (previously included in this section) due to a much longer historical period being available for 
the snow water versus precipitation evaluation of 23 versus 11 seasons, and a stronger statistical 
correlation (i.e., r value of 0.90).  Also, of interest in the case of the snowpack evaluations is the much 
lower year -to-year variability observed in the results of the snowpack multiple linear evaluation, 
suggesting that this particular equation is likely the best predictor of the “expected” natu ral target area 
precipitation based on the available control site snowpack data. This suggests a likely long-term average 
seeding effect of 3-6% for this program, with the better correlated evaluations leaning toward the upper 
side of this range.  
NAWC considers the Western Uintas evaluations to be conservative estimates of the effects of seeding 
for a variety of reasons. For example, some months that were included in the “seeded” period actually 
were not seeded during all seasons. Also, one of the control sites (Strawberry Divide) is located in an area 
that has been seeded for another program during some winter seasons. The snowpack evaluations are 
conservative because they are based upon April 1 st data. These data contain periods in the fall and early 
winter in which snowpack accumulated in the target area without any effects of seeding. This would dilute 
the indicated effects of seeding over the long term. Another potential confounding issue in evaluating the 
effects of cloud seeding in the Western Uintas target area is that the historical target/control evaluations 
seem to be impacted by urban air pollution, based upon an analysis performed and published by  NAWC 
(Griffith et al., 2005). A copy of the paper on this topic was provided in the 2005 report and is also available 
on NAWC’s website (www.nawcinc.com/nawcpapers.html).  That analysis documented an approximate 
16% decline in the November through March precipitation at Trial Lake during the period from 1956 to 
2004. In other words, cloud seeding may potentially be offsetting the negative effects of air pollution on 
precipitation. 
For the 2024 winter season, the State of Utah and local sponsors significantly expanded seeding along the 
Wasatch front. Many of the SNOTEL sites used as non-seeded “control” sites for the seasonal evaluations 
are now in areas targeted by seeding operations.  This includes the Strawberry Divide SNOTEL, which was 
an important control site historically for evaluating the Western Uintas program.  For this reason, rather 
than updating the same t arget/control results on an annual basis, a different approach was used this 
season as detailed in the following section.  
 
 
39 
 
5.5  Results – Impact of Cloud Seeding on Runoff 
Given that cloud seeding operations have been expanding in Utah due to additional state sponsorship and 
deployment of remotely operated sites, there are now very few  non-seeded control sites that are well 
correlated to the target areas. For example, one of the control sites (Strawberry Divide) for the Western 
Uintas snowpack analysis is now subject to seeding effects, and elimination of this imporatant control site 
reduces correlation to the target area significantly.  While re -creating the target/control r egression 
equations with less control sites could be a reasonable option if larger sets of seeded and historical (non-
seeded) data were available, for the current analysis another approach was taken.  NAWC examined the 
correlation of streamflow gauges for runoff originating in the WU target area to SNOTEL snow and 
seasonal precipitation data.  This allows previously obtained (long -term program average) seeding 
increase estimates to snowpack and precipitation, on the order of ~5% from the majority of the previous 
analysis, to be calibrated to streamflow increases for the program.  While not a new technique, this is an 
expansion of this analysis to additional areas where it has not been examined  before. 
Stream gauges located for such an analysis, which appear essentially unregulated (e.g. represent the 
natural runoff) and correlate well to SNOTEL sites in their respective draining basins, include the Weber 
River near Oakley (USGS site #10128500) and Chalk Creek near Coalville (USGS site #10131000). For these 
comparisons, a seasonal (March – July) streamflow total was used to best represent seasonal runoff, with 
regression again SNOTEL April 1 SWE and seasonal (November – April) precipitation.  It is recognized that 
this seasonal precipitation period is somewhat longer than the Western Uintas seedin g program alone 
which has run from December – March in most seasons, although there is frequently seeding outside of 
this time period for the nearby High Uintas program. In any case, if a somewhat conservative 5% seasonal 
increase in precipitation/snowpack  in the target area due to cloud seeding is assumed, corresponding 
estimates in streamflow increases from regression using these stream gauge data.  
For the Weber River gauge, application of a 5% increase in snowpack and precipitation to the regression 
equations showed corresponding streamflow increases of 6 -7%.  This larger increase (in terms of 
percentage) to streamflow may seem counterintuitive, but is actually an expe cted result due to the 
negative offset term in the equations.  This is related to the fact that there is some inefficiency in 
conversion of watershed precipitation and snowpack to streamflow, as some of the water evaporates or 
is taken up by the soil and used by vegetation during the growing season, etc.  Thus, increasing the total 
precipitation/snowpack by a given percentage over a  seasonal period would yield a  somewhat larger 
percentage increase to streamflow.  These 6-7% suggested increases in streamflow at this  Weber River 
gauge site, when applied to a long -term seasonal March – July average of over 115,000  acre-feet (AF), 
would yield increases of roughly 7,200 to 8,200 AF  for this location in the Weber River near the town of 
Oakley in an average season.  Note that the relationship between streamflow and snowpack/precipitation 
is itself independent of seeding operations, allowing both seeded and non -seeded seasons to be used in 
the analysis, although the results would be applicable to seeded seasons in terms of an increase estimate 
to streamflow from the seeding program.   
 
40 
 
For the Chalk Creek gauge, regression equations ( also best correlated with the Chalk Creek #1 SNOTEL) 
showed somewhat poorer correlation  than for the Weber River.  This could be due to water diversions 
upstream of the gauge site, for example, or to higher natural variability related to larger inefficiencies in 
conversion to streamflow in this northern portion of the Western Uintas target area. This is frequently the 
case in areas of somewhat lower, semi -arid terrain. The Chalk Creek streamflow regression  equations 
suggested that a 5% increase in SWE and seasonal precipitation would lead to a 10% or more increase in 
streamflow at this gauge site.  When applied to an average long-term seasonal (March – July) streamflow 
of over 40,000 AF at this gauge, seedi ng increase estimates yielded about 4200 to 4800 additional AF 
seasonally, considered representative of an average year.  
 
5.6  Results  - Impact of Cloud Seeding on Runoff  
The likely seasonal streamflow percentage increase due to seeding is in the 6-10% range based on these 
regression equations, perhaps closer to the lower end of this range if weighted by volume. This is higher 
than the assumed (likely conservative) 5% increase to snowpack or seasonal precipitation which was input 
to these regressions .  The gr eater percentage increase to runoff (as compared to precipitation or  
snowpack) is an expected result of these analyses, due the fact that only  some o f the natural 
precipitation/snowpack is converted to streamflow a nd any increase from seeding thus increases the 
efficiency of conversion. Such an increase (6-10%) applied to a total runoff value for the watershed in an 
average season would yield an estimated range of streamflow increase per season.  This would be at least 
the sum of the independent estimates from these two gauge sites, e.g. likely over 12,000 AF in an average 
season, which is a lower end number that excludes runoff not measured by these gauges.   Previous 
estimates using the total volume of a 5% increase to snowpack, scaled to the geographical size of the 
target area, resulted in an estimate on the order of 25,000 AF increase  in total water volume due to 
seeding in an average season.  This is likely a reasonable estimate based on the most recent a nalyses, 
considering that only a portion of the runoff is  accounted for by st ream gauges measuring the natural 
(unregulated) flow that are suitable for these analyses.    
 
41 
 
APPENDIX A SUSPENSION CRITERIA 
 
Certain situations require temporary or longer-term suspension of cloud seeding activities, with reference 
to well -considered criteria for consideration of possible suspensions, to minimize either an actual or 
apparent contribution of seeding to a potentially hazardous situation. The ability to forecast (anticipate) 
and judiciously avoid hazardous conditions is very important in limiting any potential liability associated 
with weather modification and to maintain a positive public image.  
There are three primary hazardous situations around which suspension criteria have been developed. 
These are:  
 1. Excess snowpack accumulation  
 2. Rain-induced winter flooding  
 3. Severe weather  
1.  Excess Snowpack Accumulation  
Snowpack begins to accumulate in the mountainous areas of Utah in November and continues through 
April. The heaviest average accumulations normally occur from January through  March. Excessive 
snowpack water content becomes a potential hazard during the resultant snowmelt. The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) maintains a network of high elevation snowpack measurement 
sites in the State of Utah, known as the SNOTEL network. SNOTEL automated observations are now readily 
available, updated as often as hourly. The following set of criteria, based upon observations from these 
SNOTEL site observations, has been developed as a guide for potential suspension of operations. 
 
42 
 
 
 
  
Snowpack-related suspension considerations will be assessed on a geographical division or sub -division 
basis. The NRCS has divided the State of Utah into 13 such divisions as follows: Bear River, Weber-Ogden 
Rivers, Provo River -Utah Lake-Jordan River, Tooe le Valley-Vernon Creek, Green River, Duchesne River, 
Price-San Rafael, Dirty Devil, South Eastern Utah, Sevier River, Beaver River, Escalante River, and Virgin 
River. The Weber -Ogden and Provo River – Utah Lake – Jordan River criteria apply to suspension 
considerations for the Western Uintas project. Since SNOTEL observations are available on a daily basis, 
suspensions (and cancellation of suspensions) can be made on a daily basis using linear interpolation of 
the first of month criteria. For the Western Ui ntas, four SNOTEL sites (Chalk Creek #1, Trial Lake, Smith 
and Morehouse, and Rock Creek) have date-specific snow water equivalent criteria on which suspension 
decisions can be based.  
Streamflow forecasts, reservoir storage levels, soil moisture content and amounts of precipitation in prior 
seasons are other factors which need to be considered when the potential for suspending seeding 
operations due to excess snowpack water content exists.  
2. Rain-induced Winter Floods  
The potential for wintertime flooding from rainfall on low elevation snowpack is fairly high in some 
(especially the more southern) target areas during the late winter/early spring period. Every precaution 
must be taken to insure accurate forecasting and timely suspension of operations during these potential 

 
43 
 
flood-producing situations. The objective of suspension under these conditions is to eliminate both the 
real and/or perceived impact of weather modification when any increase in precipitation has the potential 
of creating a flood hazard. 
3. Severe Weather  
During periods of hazardous weather associated with both winter orographic and convective precipitation 
systems it is sometimes necessary or advisable for the National Weather Service (NWS) to issue special 
weather bulletins advising the public of the weat her phenomena and the attendant hazards. Each 
phenomenon is described in terms of criteria used by the NWS in issuing special weather bulletins. Those 
that may be relevant in the conduct of winter cloud seeding programs include the following: 
• Winter Storm Warning - This is issued by the NWS when it expects heavy snow warning 
criteria to be met, along with strong winds/wind chill or freezing precipitation. 
• Flash Flood Warnings - This is issued by the NWS when flash flooding is imminent or in 
progress. In the Intermountain West, these warnings are generally issued relative to, but 
are not limited to, fall or spring convective systems. 
Seeding operations may be suspended whenever the NWS issues a weather warning for or adjacent to 
any target area. Since the objective of the cloud seeding program is to increase winter snowfall in the 
mountainous areas of the state, operations will typically not be suspended when Winter Storm Warnings 
are issued, unless there are special considerations (e.g., a heavy storm that impacts Christmas Eve travel).  
 
Flash Flood Warnings are usually issued when intense convective activity causing heavy rainfall is expected 
or is occurring. Although the probability of this situation occurring during our core operational seeding 
periods is low, the potential does exist, especially over southern sections of the state during late March 
and early April, which can include the project spring extension period. The type of storm that may cause 
problems is one that has the potential of producing 1 -2 inches (or greater) of rainfall in approximately a 
24-hour period, combined with high freezing levels (e.g., > 8,000 feet MSL). Seeding operations will be 
suspended for the duration of the warning period in the affected areas. 
NAWC’s project meteorologists have the authority to temporarily suspend localized seeding operations 
due to development of hazardous severe weather conditions even if the NWS has not issued a warning. 
This would be a rare event, but it is important for the operator to have this latitude. 
 
44 
 
APPENDIX B SEEDING OPERATIONS TABLES 
Table B-1 
Seeding Hours – Western Uintas, 2023-2024 
Storms 1-11 (rounded to quarter hour)   Note: These tables exclude hours credited to the High Uintas 
program during these events 
Storm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
Date Dec 2-3 Dec 7 Dec 7-8 Dec 23 Jan 9- 
10 Jan 10 Jan 13-
15 Jan 17 Jan 17-
18 Jan 21 Jan 25 
SITE            
WU-2            
WU-3   17.25 6 13.5 4 22.75    10 
WU-4   16 6.5   22.5    8.5 
WU-5    5.5 13.5 2.75 20.5  10.25  9.5 
WU-6 7  17 7.75 13.5 4 23    10.75 
WU-7  6.5 17.25 7.75  2.75 23.25    9 
WU-8 23.75 6.5 17.25 7.75  4.25 35.5    7.5 
WU-9 23  17.25 7  4.25 35.25 4.5    
WU-10 22.5  9 7.25   34.75   4  
WU-11   7.5  13 3.25      
WU-12 19.25  9 6.5  3.75  5.75 12   
            Storm 
Total 
 
95.5 13 127.5 62 53.5 29 172 10.25 22.25 4 55.25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
Table B-2 
Seeding Hours – Western Uintas, 2023-2024 
Storms 12-22 (rounded to quarter hour) 
Storm 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 
Date Feb 2-3 Feb 6-7 Feb 9 Feb 15 Feb 16 Feb 18 Feb 20-
21 
Feb 26-
27 Mar 2 Mar 7 Mar 
12-13 
SITE            
WU-2     4     7.25  
WU-3 16.25   2.5 5.25 3  18 4 8.25 2.75 
WU-4 12        4 9.75 21 
WU-5 14.5    3  12.25 10.5   4.75 
WU-6 16 10.5       4.5 7 6.25 
WU-7 13 2  5 5.5 3 6  5.25 5.25 5.25 
WU-8 16.25 11 6.5  5.5 3 20  5 8.75 5.5 
WU-9 17.5 10.75 7 7 4 5 23 18.25 6 6.5 5 
WU-10 17.75 24 8.5   5.5 10  6  6 
WU-11  4 6.5    6 16.25 4.75  5.25 
WU-12  11  6.25  5.5 22  5.75  6.25 
            Storm 
Total 
 
123.25 73.25 28.5 20.75 27.25 25 99.25 63 45.25 52.75 68 
 
 
46 
 
Table B-3 
Seeding Hours – Western Uintas, 2023-2024 
Storms 23-31 (rounded to quarter hour) 
Storm 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Site 
Totals 
Date Mar 23 Mar 24 Mar 25 Mar 26 Mar 28 Apr 6 Apr 15-
16 
Apr 26-
27 
Apr 
29  
SITE           
WU-2  4.75 5.5 10  9.5    41 
WU-3    4.5 5.75 9.5 11   164.25 
WU-4       19.5   119.75 
WU-5 4.25   5.25 2.75 2 11  4.5 136.75 
WU-6 4.5 4 5.75 10.5 4.5 10 16.25  5.25 188 
WU-7 4  6.25 9.5 5     141.5 
WU-8 3.5  6.25 10.5 5.5  16   225.75 
WU-9 3.5   9.75   17  4 235.5 
WU-10 4    3   20  182.25 
WU-11     5.5    4.5 76.5 
WU-12 4.5    3.5    5.5 126.5 
           Storm 
Total 
 
28.25 8.75 23.75 60 35.5 31 90.75 20 23.75  
 
 
 
47 
 
APPENDIX C GLOSSARY 
Advection: Movement of an air mass. Cold advection describes a colder air mass moving into the area, 
and warm advection is used to describe an incoming warmer air mass. Dry and moist advection can be 
used similarly. 
 
Air Mass: A term used to describe a region of the atmosphere with certain defining characteristics. For 
example, a cold or warm air mass, or a wet or dry air mass. It is a fairly subjective term but is usually 
used in reference to large (synoptic scale) regions of the atmosphere, both near the surface and/or at 
mid and upper levels of the atmosphere. 
 
Cold-core low: A typical mid-latitude type of low pressure system, where the core of the system is 
colder than its surroundings. This type of system is also defined by the cyclonic circulation being 
strongest in the upper levels of the atmosphere. The opposite is a warm-core low, which typically occurs 
in the tropics. 
 
Cold Pool: An air mass that is cold relative to its surroundings, and may be confined to a particular basin 
 
Condensation: Phase change of water vapor into liquid form. This can occur on the surface of objects 
(such as dew on the grass) or in mid-air (leading to the formation of clouds). Clouds are technically 
composed of water in liquid form, not water vapor.  
 
Confluent: Wind vectors coming closer together in a two-dimensional frame of reference (opposite of 
diffluent). The term convergence is also used similarly. 
 
Convective (or convection): Pertains to the development of precipitation areas due to the rising of 
warmer, moist air through the surrounding air mass. The warmth and moisture contained in a given air 
mass makes it lighter than colder, dryer air. Convection often leads to small-scale, locally heavy showers 
or thundershowers. The opposite precipitation type is known as stratiform precipitation. 
 
Convergence: Refers to the converging of wind vectors at a given level of the atmosphere. Low-level 
convergence (along with upper-level divergence), for instance, is associated with lifting of the air mass 
which usually leads to development of clouds and precipitation. Low-level divergence (and upper-level 
convergence) is associated with atmospheric subsidence, which leads to drying and warming. 
 
Deposition: A phase change where water vapor turns directly to solid form (ice). The opposite process is 
called sublimation. 
 
Dew point: The temperature at which condensation occurs (or would occur) with a given amount of 
moisture in the air. 
 
Diffluent: Wind vectors spreading further apart in a two-dimensional frame of reference; opposite of 
confluent 
 
Entrain: Usually used in reference to the process of a given air mass being ingested into a storm system 
 
 
48 
 
Evaporation: Phase change of liquid water into water vapor. Water vapor is usually invisible to the eye. 
 
El Nino: A reference to a particular phase of oceanic and atmospheric temperature and circulation 
patterns in the tropical Pacific, where the prevailing easterly trade winds weaken or dissipate. Often has 
an effect on mid-latitude patterns as well, such as increased precipitation in southern portions of the 
U.S. and decreased precipitation further north. The opposite phase is called La Nina. 
 
Front (or frontal zone): Reference to a temperature boundary with either incoming colder air (cold 
front) or incoming warmer air (warm front); can sometimes be a reference to a stationary temperature 
boundary line (stationary front) or a more complex type known as an occluded front (where the 
temperature change across a boundary can vary in type at different elevations).  
 
Glaciogenic: Ice-forming (aiding the process of nucleation); usually used in reference to cloud seeding 
nuclei 
 
GMT (or UTC, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at 
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7 
hours. 
 
Graupel: A precipitation type that can be described as “soft hail”, that develops due to riming 
(nucleation around a central core). It is composed of opaque (white) ice, not clear hard ice such as that 
contained in hailstones. It usually indicated the presence of convective clouds and can be associated 
with electrical charge separation and occasionally lightning activity. 
 
High Pressure (or Ridge): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable weather. 
Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic 
(clockwise) circulation pattern. 
 
Inversion: Refers to a layer of the atmosphere in which the temperature increase with elevation 
 
Jet Stream or Upper-Level Jet (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of 
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track 
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-
latitude synoptic-scale storm development. 
 
La Nina: The opposite phase of that known as El Nino in the tropical Pacific. During La Nina the easterly 
tropical trade winds strengthen and can lead in turn to a strong mid-latitude storm track, which often 
brings wetter weather to northern portions of the U.S.  
 
Longwave (or longwave pattern): The longer wavelengths, typically on the order of 1,000 – 2,000+ miles 
of the typical ridge/trough pattern around the northern (or southern) Hemisphere, typically most 
pronounced in the mid-latitudes. 
 
Low-Level Jet: A zone of maximum wind speed in the lower atmosphere. Can be caused by geographical 
features or various weather patterns, and can influence storm behavior and dispersion of cloud seeding 
materials 
 
49 
 
 
Low-pressure (or trough): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather. 
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic (counter-
clockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere. 
 
Mesoscale: Sub - synoptic scale, about 100 miles or less; this is the size scale of more localized weather 
features (such as thunderstorms or mountain-induced weather processes). 
 
Microphysics: Used in reference to composition and particle types in a cloud 
 
MSL (Mean Sea Level): Elevation height reference in comparison to sea level 
 
Negative (ly) tilted trough: A low-pressure trough where a portion is undercut, such that a frontal zone 
can be in a northwest to southeast orientation. 
 
Nucleation: The process of supercooled water droplets in a cloud turning to ice. This is the process that 
is aided by cloud seeding. For purposes of cloud seeding, there are three possible types of cloud 
composition: Liquid (temperature above the freezing point), supercooled (below freezing but still in 
liquid form), and ice crystals.  
 
Nuclei: Small particles that aid water droplet or ice particle formation in a cloud  
 
Orographic: Terrain-induced weather processes, such as cloud or precipitation development on the 
upwind side of a mountain range. Orographic lift refers to the lifting of an air mass as it encounters a 
mountain range. 
 
Pressure Heights:  
(700 millibars, or mb): Corresponds to approximately 10,000 feet above sea level (MSL); 850 mb 
corresponds to about 5,000 feet MSL; and 500 mb corresponds to about 18,000 feet MSL. These are 
standard height levels that are occasionally referenced, with the 700-mb level most important regarding 
cloud-seeding potential in most of the western U.S. 
 
Positive (ly) tilted trough: A normal U-shaped trough configuration, where an incoming cold front would 
generally be in a northeast– southwest orientation. 
 
Reflectivity: The density of returned signal from a radar beam, which is typically bounced back due to 
interaction with precipitation particles (either frozen or liquid) in the atmosphere. The reflectivity 
depends on the size, number, and type of particles that the radar beam encounters 
 
Ridge (or High Pressure System): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable 
weather. Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic 
(clockwise) circulation pattern. 
 
Ridge axis: The longitude band corresponding to the high point of a ridge 
 
 
50 
 
Rime (or rime ice): Ice buildup on an object (often on an existing precipitation particle) due to the 
freezing of supercooled water droplets. 
 
Shortwave (or shortwave pattern): Smaller-scale wave features of the weather pattern typically seen at 
mid-latitudes, usually on the order of a few to several hundred miles; these often correspond to 
individual frontal systems 
 
Silver iodide: A compound commonly used in cloud seeding because of the similarity of its molecular 
structure to that of an ice crystal. This structure helps in the process of nucleation, where supercooled 
cloud water changes to ice crystal form. 
 
Storm Track (sometimes reference as the Jet Stream): A zone of maximum storm propagation and 
development, usually concentrated in the mid-latitudes. 
 
Stratiform: Usually used in reference to precipitation, this implies a large area of precipitation that has a 
fairly uniform intensity except where influenced by terrain, etc. It is the result of larger-scale (synoptic 
scale) weather processes, as opposed to convective processes. 
 
Sublimation: The phase change in which water in solid form (ice) turns directly into water vapor. The 
opposite process is deposition. 
 
Subsidence: The process of a given air mass moving downward in elevation, such as often occurs on the 
downwind side of a mountain range 
 
Supercooled: Liquid water (such as tiny cloud droplets) occurring at temperatures below the freezing 
point (32 F or 0 C). 
 
Synoptic Scale: A scale of hundreds to perhaps 1,000+ miles, the size scale at which high and low 
pressure systems develop 
 
Trough (or low pressure system): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather. 
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic (counter-
clockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere. 
 
Trough axis: The longitude band corresponding to the low point of a trough 
 
Upper-Level Jet or Jet Stream (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of 
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track 
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-
latitude synoptic-scale storm development. 
 
 
UTC (or GMT, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at 
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7 
hours. 
 
 
51 
 
Vector: Term used to represent wind velocity (speed + direction) at a given point 
 
Velocity: Describes speed of an object, often used in the description of wind intensities 
 
Vertical Wind Profiler: Ground-based system that measures wind velocity at various levels above the 
site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 