  Annual Cloud Seeding Report
Book Cliffs/Tavaputs Cloud Seeding
             Program
     2024-2025 Winter Season

              Prepared For:
 State of Utah, Division of Water Resources


              Prepared By:
              Todd Flanagan




 North American Weather Consultants, Inc.
      8180 S. Highland Dr., Suite B-2
            Sandy, Utah 84093




                 June 2025
                                                           Table of Contents

The Science Behind Cloud Seeding ................................................................................................................ i
CLIMATE TRENDS .......................................................................................................................................... ii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................. iv
1.0         INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................................ 1
               1.1       Seasonal Precipitation....................................................................................................... 1
               1.2       Climate Overview.............................................................................................................. 2
               1.3       Increase Projections.......................................................................................................... 5
               1.4       Project Design ................................................................................................................... 5
2.0         WEATHER DATA AND MODELS USED IN SEEDING OPERATIONS..................................................... 7
3.0         OPERATIONS DURING THE 2024-25 SEASON................................................................................. 14
               3.1       Storm Summary .............................................................................................................. 17
4.0         TARGET/CONTROL EVALUATIONS ................................................................................................. 27
5.0         CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.................................................................................... 30
Appendix A SUSPENSION CRITERIA.......................................................................................................... 31
Appendix B GLOSSARY OF RELEVANT METEOROLOGICAL TERMS........................................................... 36
                                   WEATHER MODIFICATION
                               The Science Behind Cloud Seeding
The Science
The cloud-seeding process aids precipitation formation by
enhancing ice crystal production in clouds. When the ice
crystals grow sufficiently, they become snowflakes and fall to
the ground.
Silver iodide has been selected for its environmental safety and
superior efficiency in producing ice in clouds. Silver iodide adds
microscopic particles with a structural similarity to natural ice
crystals. Ground-based and aircraft-borne technologies can be
used to add the particles to the clouds.

Safety
Research has clearly documented that cloud seeding with
silver-iodide aerosols shows no environmentally harmful effect.
Iodine is a component of many necessary amino acids. Silver is
both quite inert and naturally occurring, the amounts released
are far less than background silver already present in unseeded
areas.

Effectiveness
Numerous studies performed by universities, professional
research organizations, private utility companies and weather
modification providers have conclusively demonstrated the
ability for Silver Iodide to augment precipitation under the
proper atmospheric conditions.




                                                       i
CLIMATE TRENDS
Every ten years, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA) releases a summary of various
U.S. weather conditions for the past three decades to determines average values for a variety of
conditions, including, temperature and precipitation. This is known as the U.S Climate normal, with a 30-
year average, representing the “new normal” for our climate. These 30-year normal values can help to
determine a departure from historic norms and identify current weather trends.

The current 30-year average ranges from 1990 – 2020. Images in Figures 1 and 2 show how each 30-year
average for the past 120 years compares to the composite 20th century average for temperature and
precipitation. For the western U.S., the 1990-2020 average show much warmer than average
temperatures, in comparison to the 100-year 20th century average. When comparing precipitation for the
past 30 years to both the previous 30-year average and the 1901-2000 average, the American Southwest
(including portions of Utah, Arizona, California and Nevada) has seen as much as a 10% decrease in
average annual precipitation.




Figure 1.       U.S. Annual Temperature compared to 20th-Century Average




                                                   ii
Figure 2.   U.S. Annual Precipitation compared to 20th-Century Average




                                                iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The fifth season (fourth full season) of the Book Cliffs/Tavaputs Cloud Seeding Program began on
November 1, 2024, and continued through April 30, 2025. The program’s focus is on precipitation
enhancement efforts to increase snowpack and runoff in the Tavaputs Range/Book Cliffs region of eastern
Utah, generally above 6000-7000 feet. Five manually operated CNGs were used for seeding operations,
similar to previous seasons. In the summer of 2023, the Legislature of Utah granted the Utah Division of
Water Resources (UDWR) a substantial increase in funding for cloud seeding projects across the state of
Utah. A large portion of this new funding was used for the fabrication, deployment, maintenance and use
of remotely operated and high-output cloud seeding generators across the state of Utah. One of these
new remotely operated generators was strategically placed at Emma Park Road, northeast of Helper so
that it could aid in seeding alongside the existing manually operated generators in certain storm periods.
Unfortunately, the remote generator had numerous issues that prevented it from being operated during
the 2024-25 season.

The 2024-25 season was fairly active for Utah as a whole, with over 30 storm periods occurring across the
state. Seeding operations for the Book Cliffs program took place during a third of these events, with wind
flow and stability issues the primary factors limiting seedability for the target area. A total of ten seeded
storm events occurred over a combined period of 16 days. A total of 310.25 hours of seeding time from
all CNG units was recorded, amounting to 2482 g of silver iodide (AgI) used for seeding for the season.

With the conclusion of the season, a brief discussion of statistical analysis via target/control analysis is
presented; however, with the low number of seeded seasons thus far, statistical analysis cannot produce
conclusive results.




                                                     iv
1.0     INTRODUCTION
North American Weather Consultants (NAWC) has been involved in cloud seeding operations since the
1950s, beginning in California and in more recent decades, various other states and countries. Due to
high natural precipitation variability and the increased demand for water, cloud seeding has been
conducted over large areas of Utah for over 40 years. Cloud seeding in Utah is regulated and cost shared
by the Utah Department of Natural Resources through the Division of Water Resources.

Most cloud seeding programs in Utah are conducted for relatively high-yield areas of the Wasatch Range
and Plateau, areas from the northern to southern borders of the state, as well as the Uinta Range in
northeastern Utah. These programs are normally conducted from November to April in order to target
winter storms.

In 2020, NAWC was contacted by Daniel Campbell from the Range Valley Ranch requesting information
regarding the potential for cloud seeding operations over the Tavaputs Plateau with the intent of
increasing snowfall. Upon further discussion, it was determined that there were multiple entities with a
vested interest in augmenting the precipitation that occurs in portions of the Rocky Mountains around
the Tavaputs Plateau. In order to determine the feasibility of a program in this area of Utah, NAWC
performed preliminary research to estimate the potential increase in precipitation and runoff in the area.

Given the remote nature of this portion of the Rocky Mountains, snow gauges and stream flow gauges
are limited, as are historic records. Fortunately, NAWC’s experience in other portions of the state,
particularly those portions of the state with similar geographical and climatological patterns, assisted in
the analysis of potential seeding effects for the program.



1.1     Seasonal Precipitation
To determine the potential efficacy of a program and the value of such a program, NAWC first evaluates
historical precipitation data for the intended target area. Two measures are of particular importance when
determining the value of a cloud seeding program. The first is the total precipitation that occurs during
portions of the calendar year when storms are typically seeable. This is typically measured in inches of
total precipitation. The second, which is only applicable to higher elevation cloud seeding programs, is a
measure of the amount of water stored in snowpack throughout the cold season. This is measured in
terms of snow water equivalent (SWE) and represents the depth of water in inches that would result if
the current snowpack were melted. Both of these measurements are representative of the amounts of
liquid water, the first being a representation of the total amount of water that has fallen in the form of
rain or snow, the second representing the amount of water stored in the existing snowpack.

To determine the values for these key metrics, NAWC utilizes data from Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) sites,
administered by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Higher areas of the Tavaputs
Plateau (east of Price) have two available SNOTEL sites: the Timberline site at 8,736 feet elevation
(established during the 2007-08 season) and Corral site at 8,207 feet (established during the 2013-14
season). These two sites, as well as another site near the western edge of the target area (Indian Canyon)

                                                    1
at the summit along Highway 191, are designated in Figure 1.1 as blue circles. The Indian Canyon site is
over 9,000 feet in elevation and does have a long-term record, although is less representative of the core
area of this seeding program.

Although having too short of a period of record to establish a reliable long-term normal value, the
available record suggests that SWE values peak in March with median values of 9.3 inches of liquid water
equivalence at Timberline and 8.7 inches at Corral. Typical total precipitation observed during the cold
season (roughly November – April) is generally near 15 inches in these areas, with dry years receiving as
little as half this amount of precipitation and the wettest years receiving nearly double this amount.

Annual precipitation in this area, in contrast to some other ranges in Utah, exhibits an overall maximum
from late July to early/mid-October, associated with a seasonal monsoonal pattern. The driest months
tend to be during late fall to early winter (November/December), with the November - April season
representing roughly half (or slightly less) of the annual total precipitation of 20-25 inches on average.



1.2     Climate Overview
Climate analysis for the Book Cliffs / western Tavaputs Plateau area was conducted by NAWC based on
two SNOTEL sites (Timberline and Corral) located near the center of the target area. The analyses showed
that the winter climate is somewhat drier in this area than that of most areas with winter seeding
programs. These sites receive roughly 8-10 inches of precipitation / snow water content during the
November – April period on average, although there is a high year to year variability. In some wet years,
these sites can receive as much as 15-20 inches during the winter season period, and in dry years can
receive less than 6 inches. A large portion of precipitation that falls in these areas occurs during the
summer monsoon period from roughly late July to early October. This warm season precipitation is not
considered seedable from ground-based sites due to temperature parameters, as well as its minor
contribution to runoff and water storage. Seeding during the winter season can add additional moisture
to the snowpack which contributes substantially to runoff and water storage. One key attribute of the
eastern Utah basins and mountains is that the highest producing winter season precipitation periods are
associated with south to southwesterly winds, with westerly to northerly wind patterns generally
associated with drier conditions. These and other attributes have impacted the program design that was
recommended and implemented for the Book Cliffs program. Figure 1.2 shows the average annual
precipitation across the state of Utah.




                                                    2
Figure 1.1.   Location of SNOTEL sites in the Book Cliffs area.




                                                     3
Figure 1.2.     Mean annual precipitation for the state of Utah based on 30-year period from 1991-2020.


There are three potential concerns as far as targeting this area with cloud seeding operations. The first,
is that winter storms (or portions of storm) that come from the south do tend to be somewhat warmer
than precipitation periods with northwesterly winds. Cloud seeding agents are generally most active at
temperatures between approximately -5° and -15°C. Due to the warmer nature of these southerly storms,
the -5°C level inside the cloud deck may be found at elevations higher than the mountain barrier. This is
often the case with NAWC’s California programs, and it does not always negate cloud seeding efforts but
can render a program less effective. The second concern is that low-level thermodynamic stability
(inversion) can affect the dispersion of seeding material from ground-based sites. Though the prevalence
of stability is not as notorious in this region as it is in the Uinta Basin, this is something operational
meteorologists will be aware of in regard to program design and seeding increase projections. The third


                                                     4
concern, and one that occurred several times during this season, involved the rain/snow shadowing
occurring with storms containing at least moderate winds and moisture arriving from the west or
northwest; although other parts of Utah may have received snow/liquid equivalent moisture from a given
storm, downsloping northwest flow brought much drier air into the Castle Country/Emery County area
with little to no precipitation.



1.3     Increase Projections
Based on all of the considerations, it was estimated that this area could be reasonably targeted by an
array of four or more ground-based sites, ideally located above the valley floor (above the 6,000-foot
elevation level) to maximize material dispersion.

Long term historic records and extensive mathematical modeling using these records have produced
seasonal seeding increase estimates of 3 to 15% in precipitation for well executed weather modification
programs, in the Utah and Colorado Rockies. The program most topographically and climatologically
similar to this proposed program is the weather modification program comprising the eastern two thirds
of the Uinta Mountain Range. Data for the Uintas program suggests an increase in seasonal precipitation
that is on the lower end of the overall range shown above, or roughly 3-5% resulting from cloud seeding
endeavors. We therefore predict an estimated seasonal increase of a similar 3-5% for the November –
April period for the Book Cliffs program given its climatological and topographical similarities. This would
equate to roughly 0.3 to 0.5 inches of additional precipitation (liquid water equivalent) or roughly 3-5
inches of additional seasonal snowfall. Based on the size of the target area (outlined in Figure 1.3), NAWC
expects that this increase would amount to between 10,000 and 20,000 acre-feet (AF) of additional
snowmelt runoff, depending on the nature of seasonal weather patterns. In drier climates where ground
water absorption rates are high, the increases in stream flow can substantially exceed the seasonal
precipitation increase on a percentage basis. This is the result of runoff being more efficient when
precipitation is higher, as well as a reduction in the percentage of ground water absorption when snow
melt rates are higher.



1.4     Program Design
In order to maximize the program coverage and contribution to spring runoff, operational seeding sites
were distributed from the Price area, southeast to Green River, with the primary target area being those
areas of the Tavaputs Range that exceed 6,000 to 7,000 ft in elevation. Desirable generator locations as
well as NAWC’s proposed target area are represented in Figure 1.3. Note that the site at Emma Park Rd.
is a remotely operated CNG site (non-operable in 2024-25).




                                                     5
Figure 1.3.     Book Cliffs seeding sites and target area for 2024-25.


Estimates of potential cloud seeding benefits in the Book Cliffs area were based on those made for seeding
in the Uinta Range, given the general proximity and similarities of climate and barrier orientation. While
many winter programs in Utah are estimated to produce increases of 5-10% or locally more to the winter
snowpack, estimates for the Uinta Range are lower, on the order of 3-5% and these estimates were used
as the basis for the Book Cliffs program. A 4% increase, applied to total winter season precipitation in the
Book Cliffs, results in an estimate of roughly a 0.4 inch potential increase for seeding in the Book Cliffs.

This report summarizes operations conducted for the Book Cliffs program during the 2024-25 season, as
well as a brief discussion of target/control precipitation and snowpack analysis, which could become
useful for the estimation of seeding benefits if the program were to continue.




                                                       6
2.0    WEATHER DATA AND MODELS USED IN SEEDING OPERATIONS
Meteorological information is acquired online from a wide variety of sources, including some subscriber
services. This information includes weather forecast model data, surface observations, rawinsonde
(weather balloon) upper-air observations, satellite images, radar information and weather cameras.
NAWC’s meteorologists have access to all meteorological products from their homes, allowing continued
monitoring and conduct of seeding operations outside of regular business hours. This wide variety of
available products and information helps NAWC meteorologists to determine when conditions are
appropriate for cloud seeding.

Figures 2.1 – 2.6 show examples of some of the available weather information that was used in this
decision-making process during the 2024-25 winter season. These include weather radar images, satellite
images, upper air wind and temperature maps, rawinsonde/weather balloon soundings, surface
observations and hazards such as lightning. Global and regional forecast models are a cornerstone of
modern weather forecasting, and an important tool for operational meteorologists. These models
forecast a variety of parameters at different levels of the atmosphere, including winds, temperatures,
moisture, and surface parameters such as accumulated precipitation. An example of a display is shown
from the Global Forecast System (GFS) model (Figure 2.5). Other models used on a daily basis during the
program include but are not limited to the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecast
(ECMWF) model, High-Resolution Rapid Refresh (HRRR) model, and North American Model (NAM).




                                                  7
Figure 2.1.   Radar image from 0130 MST on February 14, 2025. The location of the Book Cliffs program is in
              between radar sites, so coverage is less than ideal.




                                                   8
Figure 2.2.   Infrared spectrum satellite image from 0121 MST on February 14, 2025.




                                                   9
Figure 2.3.   700 mb (approximately 10,000 feet MSL) map valid for 0500 MST (1200 UTC) on February 14,
              2025. Among the more notable map features, black contours indicate heights (in decameters) of
              700 mb pressure level, red numbers are temperature (°C), green numbers are dewpoints (°C),
              blue lines with barbs/flags represent wind speed and direction, and green contours delineate
              where dewpoints are greater than or equal to -4°C.




                                                  10
Figure 2.4.   Weather balloon/rawinsonde sounding from Salt Lake City, UT, valid at 12Z/0500 MST on
              February 14, 2025, showing temperature (red line), dewpoint (green line) and wind
              speed/direction (right side barbs) from the surface to 100 mb (approximately 52,000 feet MSL).




                                                   11
Figure 2.5.   MesoWest surface data map from 0100 MST on February 14, 2025. Surface observations are
              important for diagnosing low level wind patterns, mixing and stability.




                                                 12
Figure 2.6.   GFS (Global Forecast Systems) model 3-hour forecast (4-panel plot) during a storm event on
              February 14-15, 2025.




                                                   13
3.0      OPERATIONS DURING THE 2024-25 SEASON
The 2024-25 season was below normal for the Book Cliffs in terms of storm activity and snowpack. Snow
water equivalent (SWE) values peaked just after mid-March in higher portions of the Book Cliffs seeding
target area, where two SNOTEL sites are located. SWE values of 4.6 inches at Corral and 6.8 inches at
Timberline were observed on March 23, which is below average for the existing periods of record at these
sites. In general, the snowpack here appeared to peak at 53-73 % of the median value this season. Figure
3.1 shows the percent of median values of April 1 snow water equivalent (SWE) for the state of Utah on
April 1, 2025.




Figure 3.1.    Snow water content in Utah on April 1, 2025 (percent of median)




                                                   14
Figure 3.2 is a graph of snow water equivalent (SWE) and Figure 3.3 is cumulative water year precipitation,
both for the Timberline site from October 2024 through May 2025. Figures 3.4 and 3.5 are similar plots
for the nearby Corral site. Both SWE and precipitation were near to above normal early in the season,
with below normal values from early to mid-December through the remainder of the season. As seen in
these graphs, snowpack began to quickly melt at these sites in late March. Water year precipitation as of
May 1, 2025 ranged from 10-11 inches at these sites, or about 69-71% of the mean for that date.




Figure 3.2.     Snow Water Equivalent (SWE) graph for Timberline site, October 2024-May 2025.




Figure 3.3.     Cumulative Precipitation graph for Timberline site, October 2024-May 2025.




                                                    15
Figure 3.4.    Snow Water Equivalent (SWE) graph for Corral site, October 2024-May 2025.




Figure 3.5.    Cumulative Precipitation graph for Corral site, October 2024-May 2025.


A total of ten seeded storm events occurred for the Book Cliffs program during the 2024-25 season.
Seeding activity during each of these events is summarized in Tables 3-1a,b. A total of 310.25 generator
hours were utilized during the season.




                                                   16
                                            Table 3-1a
            Summary of seeding operations during the season through December 26, 2024.

                     Storm #             1                2                 3               4                5
                                       Nov 2-3          Nov 16           Nov 25-27       Dec 24-25         Dec 26
              Emma Park
              Remote
              BC-1 Price BC             16.25                              24.00           11.25

              BC-2 Price                19.75                                              12.75            2.50
              BC-3
                                        16.25                                              12.25
              Wellington East
              BC-4 East
                                        19.75            4.50              34.00           12.25
              Carbon
              BC-5 Green
              River
              Storm Total               72.00            4.50              58.00           48.50            2.50



                                            Table 3-1b
              Summary of seeding operations December 27, 2024 through end of season.

            Storm #              6               7                   8               9               10
                               Dec 27        Feb 13-14           Mar 3             Mar 6        Mar 13-14           Totals
        Emma Park
        Remote
        BC-1 Price BC           6.00            15.75            5.25                                               78.50

        BC-2 Price              6.25            14.50                              10.25                            66.00
        BC-3
                                                15.75            5.00                                               49.25
        Wellington East
        BC-4 East
                                7.25            13.00                              10.00           15.75           116.50
        Carbon
        BC-5 Green
        River
        Storm Total            19.50            59.00            10.25             20.25           15.75           310.25



3.1     Storm Summary
The first seeded event of the season took place on November 2-3. A trough of low pressure was pushing
into the Great Basin with embedded shortwave disturbances within it. A leading shortwave ejected out
across Utah during the day on November 2 accompanied by mid and high level moisture, but a dry sub-
cloud layer resulted in most precipitation evaporating before reaching the ground; additionally, mid-level


                                                                17
temperatures were still above freezing which negated the possibility of seeding operations. During the
overnight period, a wave of mainly light rain and snow pushed across the area, and sites were turned on
just ahead of the arrival of the precipitation. Winds were relatively light so targeting, although attainable,
was a bit difficult. The precipitation largely ended during the late morning hours on November 3, but early
in the afternoon some additional snow showers formed in the eastern part of the target area and
continued through mid-afternoon. Two sites were shut off during the noon hour, with the remaining two
running through mid-afternoon when precipitation finally ended. SWE increases of 0.1-0.25 inches were
recorded.

On November 16, a trough of low pressure over Utah had brought precipitation to northern and western
Utah over the previous 18-24 hours, with activity tapering off during the morning. Around midday,
satellite imagery and webcams showed show showers developing across the target area with light
accumulations. While winds at site locations around Price were somewhat erratic, the East Carbon site
was experiencing southwesterly winds, providing good targeting of the seeding plume and as such, the
site was activated for the afternoon while snow showers continued over the higher terrain, tapering off
by 1700 MST at which time seeding ceased. SWE increases of 0.1-0.2 inches were noted.

On November 25, a weakening atmospheric river (AR) was pushing into Utah on the south side of a trough
of low pressure over the Pacific Northwest and northern California. Precipitation began west of the area
during the late afternoon and evening hours, with initial precipitation in the Book Cliffs during the early
overnight period. One site was activated ahead of the arrival of the precipitation, with a second site turned
on during the early morning of November 26. Precipitation continued within the moderate to strong
westerly flow aloft during the day and evening, nearly unabated, with 700 mb temperatures around -5°C.
Low level winds in the Book Cliffs CNG network area were on the light side but were properly targeting
the higher terrain. Precipitation continued through the evening of November 26, but by midnight it had
ended at Price, and a couple hours later over the eastern target area. Sites were shut off in the morning
of November 27, having run for 24-34 hours. SWE increases of 0.50-1.60” were recorded in the target
area.

On December 24, a trough moved eastward from California into the Great Basin during the late afternoon
hours. Mid and high level moisture spread across the state, but initially dry sub-cloud layer evaporation
was preventing most precipitation from reaching the ground, and low level inversions were in place which
would have prevented proper targeting from occurring. Around 2100 MST, a deeper slug of moisture
arrived into Castle Country and the Book Cliffs with four of five manual CNGs activated as snow started
up and continued through the night into the morning hours of December 25, when the trough axis was
aligned north to south across central Utah. Precipitation ended across the Book Cliffs area during the
morning, and sites were turned off. SWE increases of 0.05-0.60” were recorded.

On December 26, a shortwave trough and accompanying cold front moved across northern and central
Utah during the afternoon and evening hours, with precipitation developing ahead of the cold front. Mid-
level temperatures were ideal, around -6 to -7°C, although winds were rather light. One site was activated
during the relatively brief event, running for about 2.5 hours as precipitation moved across the Book Cliffs
target area, ending by late evening. SWE totals of 0.05-0.10” were recorded during the event.


                                                     18
On December 27, west to northwest flow aloft with speeds of 40-55 kt were measured on the morning
soundings and observed by radar, with 700 mb temperatures -5 to -8°C. Low levels were initially dry and
neutrally stable. A shortwave located over northern Nevada was moving east-southeast and would cross
northern and central Utah during the afternoon and early evening. Precipitation arrived from the west-
northwest just before noon and continued through the afternoon as the shortwave moved across the area
with moderate to strong winds aloft continuing. A period of heavy precipitation towards the latter part of
the afternoon was observed in the area, with snow tapering off quickly after 1800 MST. SWE totals of 0.1-
0.4” were recorded in the target area.

On February 13, an atmospheric river being directed by a large upper low over northern California moved
into southwestern Utah accompanied by increasing southwesterly flow at mid-levels to 40-60 kt by
afternoon. Mid-level temperatures initially around -13°C rose with the arrival of the subtropical moisture
to -5°C by late afternoon. Precipitation arrived in the Book Cliffs area around midday, but initially winds
were light and variable. As the moisture profile improved towards the latter part of the afternoon/early
evening hours and winds became slightly more favorable, sites were turned on. Precipitation continued
through the overnight hours, tapering off to snow showers early on the morning of February 14 and then
ending by mid-morning, at which time sites were shut off. SWE totals of 0.2-0.5” were recorded at the
SNOTEL sites.

On March 3, a broad mid-level low moved across central and southeastern Utah. 700 mb temperatures of
-4 to -7°C were in place, and moisture profiles were marginally ideal for precipitation across the area.
Precipitation arrived from the south and southwest into the target area on the east side of the low late in
the morning. Given the marginality of the moisture and the somewhat less favorable wind flow in the CNG
network area, only a couple sites were activated while precipitation moved across the area. Towards the
latter part of the afternoon, precipitation began to taper off as the low began to push south and southeast
of the area; also, winds were becoming less favorable for targeting. For these reasons, sites were shut off.
SWE totals of around 0.2” were recorded at target area SNOTEL sites during the event.

On March 6, a trough of low pressure was centered over California and Nevada with diffluent
southwesterly flow aloft over Utah. Mid-level temperatures over eastern Utah were warm, -1 to -2°C at
700 mb but were expected to cool as the trough approached. Moisture was evident across much of the
state during the morning hours; however it was patchy across eastern Utah. Precipitation began before
noon across the area and a couple sites were activated -- not all sites as conditions were not ideal to
warrant all running given the relatively warm start to the storm. Rain and higher elevation snow continued
through the afternoon, with some heavier convective elements appearing on radar over the eastern target
area late afternoon/early evening. As the trough axis began to cross the area during the evening hours,
winds began to veer around to the northwest with precipitation ending across the Book Cliffs and sites
de-activated. SWE totals of 1.0-1.5” were recorded in the target area.

On March 13, a trough of low pressure accompanied by abundant moisture flowing into its base/southeast
flank were pushing into the Great Basin. Temperatures aloft were warm, with morning soundings showing
-2 to -3°C across northern and eastern Utah. Temperatures actually warmed a couple degrees during the
day ahead of the trough’s arrival, with light precipitation beginning around midday and continuing
through the afternoon, increasing a bit in intensity with time. Winds across much of Castle Country where

                                                    19
the generators were located were not ideal, however the site closest to the target area, East Carbon was
seeing south and southwesterly winds, albeit on the light side, and it was activated during the latter part
of the afternoon. Light to moderate precipitation continued through the evening hours ahead of a cold
front, which crossed the area during the late evening. Mid level temperatures fell to around -8°C behind
the front with snow continuing overnight, ending early in the morning of March 14 as winds became
northwesterly areawide. SWE totals of 1.2-1.5” were recorded at SNOTEL sites in the target area for this
event. This turned out to be the final seeded storm of the season, as further storms impacting the state
brought little precipitation to the Book Cliffs region, with more drier, downsloping winds occurring during
storm events.

Monthly precipitation across Utah during the seeding season is shown in Figures 3.6-3.11.




                                                    20
Figure 3.6.   November 2024 precipitation, percent of normal.




                                                 21
Figure 3.7.   December 2024 precipitation, percent of normal.




                                                  22
Figure 3.8.   January 2025 precipitation, percent of normal.




                                                   23
Figure 3.9.   February 2025 precipitation, percent of normal.




                                                   24
Figure 3.10.   March 2025 precipitation, percent of normal.




                                                   25
Figure 3.11.   April 2025 precipitation, percent of normal.




                                                     26
4.0     TARGET/CONTROL EVALUATIONS
NAWC normally attempts target/control evaluations of its operational cloud seeding programs, utilizing
SNOTEL data in and surrounding seeding target areas. This type of evaluation establishes an equation
between one or more control sites versus target sites for a historical base period, which is a period of
record before the start of a seeding program. This equation is then utilized to produce predicted natural
values, in the absence of seeding, which can then be compared to observed values from the seeded
periods. SNOTEL sites measure both accumulation water year precipitation from October 1 of each
season, and snow water equivalent (SWE) values which normally peaks around March to early April in this
area.

In a target/control evaluation, the control sites are those which would not be affected by seeding
operations, at least not from those of the program being evaluated. Some of these sites may be affected
by seeding from other programs in the state, in which case careful consideration must be given as to
whether those effects would be consistent over time and allow a site to be used as a control. The target
sites are those within the seeding target area, which may include one or more sites that are expected to
be affected by seeding operations.

For the Book Cliffs target area, three potential target SNOTEL sites were considered (see Figure 1.1 in
Section 1.0). Corral, at 8,207 feet elevation, has data only since water year 2014. The nearby Timberline
site, at 8,736 feet, has data beginning in the 2008 water year. These two sites are near the geographic
center of the seeding program target area. Another site, Indian Canyon, is located at the summit along
Highway 191, near the Emma Park Road seeding site. This site is at 9,171 feet elevation and is one of the
earliest SNOTEL sites with data beginning in the 1979 water year. However, it is located essentially along
the edge of where seeding effects may occur with this program, and so it is not very suitable for either a
target or a control site, as it may sometimes (but only occasionally) be affected by seeding.

For the Timberline (target) site, best-correlated control sites were selected that should result in
reasonable target/control evaluations using a base (pre-seeding) period that includes water years 2008-
2020, a total of 13 seasons. By far the best correlated control site appears to be Mosby Mountain, at
9,553 feet, on the southern flank of the Uinta Range. Although this site is within a seeding program, it has
been included in this program consistently during this entire period and continues to be, such that it may
still be a suitable control site given the long-term nature of the seeding program there. Another well
correlated site is East Willow Creek, located further east on the Tavaputs Plateau. This site is at 8,302
feet, roughly 10 miles east of the Green River, and has data beginning in the 1987 water year. It would
likely be largely unaffected by the Book Cliffs seeding program. A third site that was included is Camp
Jackson, at 8,858 feet in the Abajo Range of southeastern Utah with data beginning in the 1986 water
year. Figure 4.1 shows the target and control sites selected for this analysis.




                                                    27
Figure 4.1.     SNOTEL map of central/eastern Utah with the Book Cliffs evaluation target sites (red) and
                control sites (green).


For these data sets, both linear and multiple linear equations were developed. The linear regression
compares two variables, in this case an average of the data from three control sites to the target site. The
multiple linear regression uses a separate coefficient for each control site, allowing a more complex

                                                     28
equation to be developed. For precipitation, the associated R values were high, 0.86 for the linear and
0.95 for the multiple linear. For snow (using SWE), April 1 data is typically used, but some years have a
large amount of snow melt prior to this that can essentially invalidate the April 1 SWE for the purposes of
this type of evaluation. For this reason, both April 1 and March 1 snowpack were examined. Using the
same selection of target and control sites, correlations were good for both with R values of 0.92 and 0.98
(linear/multiple linear) for April 1 SWE and 0.95/0.97 respectively for (linear/multiple linear) evaluations
of March 1 SWE.

These sets of equations were then applied to the 2024-25 seeded season, the fourth full season of seeding.
For this type of analysis, single-season results do not have much mathematical significance, with the
evaluation method becoming more meaningful for long standing programs (ideally, 10-20 years or more).
Combined season results of this type typically show seeding program increases in the 5-10% range (based
on seasonal precipitation or SWE) for most seeded mountain ranges in Utah. For the Book Cliffs program,
the initial estimates made by NAWC were lower (3-5%) which is more similar to estimates for seeding in
the Uinta Range north of the target area. Application of the equations for the Book Cliffs program showed
mixed results for the 2024-25 single season, suggesting, as expected, that there are not enough seeded
data available at this point to produce any conclusive results for the Book Cliffs program; additionally, the
2023-24 season was much shorter than other seasons with seeding not beginning until January 2024, and
because of the late start there was a limited amount of seeding; for this reason, the 2023-24 season will
not be included in analysis. At the very least, five full seeding seasons would ideally be needed before any
initial statistics regarding the efficacy of the Book Cliffs program will be published in the yearly report.




                                                     29
5.0     CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A total of ten storm events were seeded in the Book Cliffs during the 2024-25 season, the fourth full
season for the seeding program in this area. There was a total of 310.25 seeding generator hours utilized.
Precipitation was below average this season, with a couple of good seeding opportunities during the
winter.

Given that the program has been active for five seasons (four full and one half), and with a limited number
of available seeding site locations, there is still not enough data available at this point to provide any
realistic estimates of the seeding effects achieved. The target/control evaluations unfortunately require
a number of seeded seasons in order to make an estimate that has a reasonable confidence level.

Drought periods usually offer less opportunities for seeding, and continuing seeding during wetter season
can contribute substantially to surface and ground water resources and storage. The November – April
period is considered to be the seasonal window for potential operations, although some portions of this
period (particularly March – April) are likely to provide the best seeding opportunities for this area in a
typical season.

Seeding sites should be located in areas which are ideal for targeting, based on prevailing wind patterns,
and ideally should be above the valley floor to avoid shallow surface-based temperature inversions. It is
also important to have site operators who are usually available, in order to effectively utilize the
equipment. Land use issues and lack of residents in some areas of Utah can make this a challenge.
Maintaining an adequate network of sites and operators should be a priority if the program were to
continue. Remote sites higher up directly in the target area might allow for more instances of seedability
as they may not be subject to the downsloping/drying effects of stronger west/northwest flow into Castle
Country, where the current CNG network exists.




                                                    30
    APPENDIX A



SUSPENSION CRITERIA




        31
Certain situations require temporary or longer-term suspension of cloud seeding activities, with reference
to well-considered criteria for consideration of possible suspensions, to minimize either an actual or
apparent contribution of seeding to a potentially hazardous situation. The ability to forecast (anticipate)
and judiciously avoid hazardous conditions is very important in limiting any potential liability associated
with weather modification and to maintain a positive public image.

       There are three primary hazardous situations around which suspension criteria have been
developed. These are:

        •   Excess snowpack accumulation
        •   Rain-induced winter flooding
        •   Severe weather

Excess Snowpack Accumulation
Snowpack begins to accumulate in the mountainous areas of Utah in November and continues through
April. The heaviest average accumulations normally occur from January through March. Excessive
snowpack water content becomes a potential hazard during the resultant snowmelt. The Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) maintains a network of high elevation snowpack measurement
sites in the State of Utah, known as the SNOTEL network. SNOTEL automated observations are now
readily available, updated as often as hourly. The following set of criteria, based upon observations from
these SNOTEL site observations, has been developed as a guide for potential suspension of operations.




                                                    32
33
Snowpack-related suspension considerations will be assessed on a geographical division or sub-division
basis. The NRCS has divided the State of Utah into 13 such divisions as follows: Bear River, Weber-Ogden
Rivers, Provo River-Utah Lake-Jordan River, Tooele Valley-Vernon Creek, Green River, Duchesne River,
Price-San Rafael, Dirty Devil, Southeastern Utah, Sevier River, Beaver River, Escalante River, and Virgin
River. Since SNOTEL observations are available on a daily basis, suspensions (and cancellation of
suspensions) can be made on a daily basis using linear interpolation of the first of month criteria. There
are a number of SNOTEL stations in the various basins of central and southern Utah on which these criteria
are based. These include Castle Valley, Harris Flat, and Farnsworth Lake in the Sevier Basin; Midway
Valley, Kolob, Harris Flat, Webster Flat, and Long Flat in southwestern Utah; and Rocky Basin Settlement
and Mining Fork in eastern Tooele County.

Streamflow forecasts, reservoir storage levels, soil moisture content and amounts of precipitation in prior
seasons are other factors which need to be considered when the potential for suspending seeding
operations due to excess snowpack water content exists.

Rain-induced Winter Floods
The potential for wintertime flooding from rainfall on low elevation snowpack is fairly high in some
(especially the more southern) target areas during the late winter/early spring period. Every precaution
must be taken to insure accurate forecasting and timely suspension of operations during these potential
flood-producing situations. The objective of suspension under these conditions is to eliminate both the
real and/or perceived impact of weather modification when any increase in precipitation has the potential
of creating a flood hazard.

Severe Weather
During periods of hazardous weather associated with both winter orographic and convective precipitation
systems it is sometimes necessary or advisable for the National Weather Service (NWS) to issue special
weather bulletins advising the public of the weather phenomena and the attendant hazards. Each
phenomenon is described in terms of criteria used by the NWS in issuing special weather bulletins. Those
which may be relevant in the conduct of winter cloud seeding programs include the following:

        ▪       Winter Storm Warning - This is issued by the NWS when it expects heavy snow warning
                criteria to be met, along with strong winds/wind chill or freezing precipitation.
        ▪       Flash Flood Warning - This is issued by the NWS when flash flooding is imminent or in
                progress. In the Intermountain West, these warnings are generally issued relative to,
                but are not limited to, fall or spring convective systems.
        ▪       Severe Thunderstorm Warning – This is issued by the NWS when thunderstorms
                producing winds of 58 mph or higher and/or 1” or larger hail.

Seeding operations may be suspended whenever the NWS issues a weather warning for or adjacent to
any target area. Since the objective of the cloud seeding program is to increase winter snowfall in the

                                                        34
mountainous areas of the state, operations will typically not be suspended when Winter Storm Warnings
are issued, unless there are special considerations (e.g., a heavy storm that impacts Christmas Eve travel).

Flash Flood and Severe Thunderstorm Warnings are usually issued when intense convective activity
causing heavy rainfall/strong winds/hail is expected or is occurring. Although the probability of this
situation occurring during our core operational seeding periods is low, the potential does exist, especially
over southern sections of the state during late March and April. The type of storm that may cause
problems is one that has the potential of producing 1-2 inches (or greater) of rainfall in approximately a
24-hour period, combined with high freezing levels (e.g., > 8,000 feet MSL). Seeding operations will be
suspended for the duration of the warning period in the affected areas.

NAWC’s project meteorologists have the authority to temporarily suspend localized seeding operations
due to development of hazardous severe weather conditions even if the NWS has not issued a warning.
This would be a rare event, but it is important for the operator to have this latitude.




                                                        35
           APPENDIX B


GLOSSARY OF METEOROLOGICAL TERMS




                 36
Advection: Movement of an air mass. Cold advection describes a colder air mass moving into the area,
and warm advection is used to describe an incoming warmer air mass. Dry and moist advection can be
used similarly.

Air Mass/airmass: A term used to describe a region of the atmosphere with certain defining
characteristics. For example, a cold or warm air mass, or a wet or dry air mass. It is a fairly subjective
term but is usually used in reference to large (synoptic scale) regions of the atmosphere, both near the
surface and/or at mid and upper levels of the atmosphere.

Atmospheric River/AR: A long, narrow and transient corridor of strong horizontal water vapor transport
that is typically associated with a low-level jet stream ahead of the cold front of a low pressure system.
The water vapor in ARs is supplied by tropical and subtropical moisture sources and frequently produces
heavy precipitation where they are forced upward, e.g., by mountains or dynamic lifting.

Balloon Sounding: see Sounding.

Cell: in radar usage, a local maximum in radar reflectivity that undergoes a life cycle of growth and decay,
having both an updraft and a downdraft region.

Cold-core low: A typical mid-latitude type of low pressure system, where the core of the system is colder
than its surroundings. This type of system is also defined by the cyclonic circulation being strongest in the
upper levels of the atmosphere. The opposite is a warm-core low, which typically occurs in the tropics.

Cold Pool: An air mass that is cold relative to its surroundings and may be confined to a particular basin.

Condensation: Phase change of water vapor into liquid form. This can occur on the surface of objects
(such as dew on the grass) or in mid-air (leading to the formation of clouds). Clouds are technically
composed of water in liquid form, not water vapor.

Confluent: Wind vectors coming closer together in a two-dimensional frame of reference (opposite of
diffluent). The term convergence is also used similarly.

Convective (or convection): Pertains to the development of precipitation areas due to the rising of
warmer, moist air through the surrounding air mass. The warmth and moisture contained in a given air
mass makes it lighter than colder, dryer air. Convection often leads to small-scale, locally heavy showers
or thundershowers. The opposite precipitation type is known as stratiform precipitation.

Convergence: Refers to the converging of wind vectors at a given level of the atmosphere. Low-level
convergence (along with upper-level divergence), for instance, is associated with lifting of the air mass
which usually leads to development of clouds and precipitation. Low-level divergence (and upper-level
convergence) is associated with atmospheric subsidence, which leads to drying and warming.

Cyclonic Flow: Counter-clockwise motion, primarily around low pressure (cyclone).



                                                         37
Deposition: A phase change where water vapor turns directly to solid form (ice). The opposite process is
called sublimation.

Dew point: The temperature at which condensation occurs (or would occur) with a given amount of
moisture in the air.

Diffluent: Wind vectors spreading further apart in a two-dimensional frame of reference; opposite of
confluent.

Disturbance: see Low pressure, shortwave.

Dry slot: A zone of dry (and usually cloud-free) air that wraps into the southern and eastern parts of a low
pressure system; easily viewed on satellite imagery.

Entrain: Usually used in reference to the process of a given air mass being ingested into a storm system.

Evaporation: Phase change of liquid water into water vapor. Water vapor is usually invisible to the eye.

El Niño: A reference to a particular phase of oceanic and atmospheric temperature and circulation
patterns in the tropical Pacific, where the prevailing easterly trade winds weaken or dissipate. Often
influences mid-latitude patterns as well, such as increased precipitation in southern portions of the U.S.
and decreased precipitation further north. The opposite phase is called La Nina.

Front (or frontal zone): Reference to a temperature boundary with either incoming colder air (cold front)
or incoming warmer air (warm front); can sometimes be a reference to a stationary temperature
boundary line (stationary front) or a more complex type known as an occluded front (where the
temperature change across a boundary can vary in type at different elevations).

Frontal band: A band of clouds/precipitation along a cold or warm front.

Glaciogenic: Ice-forming (aiding the process of nucleation); usually used in reference to cloud seeding
nuclei.

GMT (or UTC, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7
hours.

Graupel: A precipitation type that can be described as “soft hail”, that develops due to riming (nucleation
around a central core). It is composed of opaque (white) ice, not clear hard ice such as that contained in
hailstones. It usually indicates the presence of convective clouds and can be associated with electrical
charge separation and occasionally lightning activity.

High Pressure (or Ridge): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable weather.
Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic (clockwise)
circulation pattern.

                                                        38
Infrared (satellite): imagery sensed in the 3-13 μm wavelength region of the electromagnetic spectrum,
usually referring to the thermal infrared region.

Inside Slider: A trough or area of low pressure that moves south-southeast along or parallel to the Sierra
Nevada mountains before swinging east into the Great Basin or Desert Southwest. These systems typically
do not have much moisture with them but can have cold to very cold air accompanying them. The track
of these systems typically brings Santa Ana winds as they increase the northeast-southwest pressure
gradient.

Inversion: Refers to a layer of the atmosphere in which the temperature increases with elevation, usually
associated with stability.

Jet Stream or Upper-Level Jet (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-latitude
synoptic-scale storm development.

La Niña: The opposite phase of that known as El Nino in the tropical Pacific. During La Nina the easterly
tropical trade winds strengthen and can lead in turn to a strong mid-latitude storm track, which often
brings wetter weather to northern portions of the U.S.

Longwave (or longwave pattern): The longer wavelengths, typically on the order of 1,000 – 2,000+ miles
of the typical ridge/trough pattern around the northern (or southern) Hemisphere, typically most
pronounced in the mid-latitudes.

Low-Level Jet: A zone of maximum wind speed in the lower atmosphere. Can be caused by geographical
features or various weather patterns and can influence storm behavior and dispersion of cloud seeding
materials.

Low pressure (or low or trough): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather.
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic
(counterclockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere.

Mesoscale: Sub-synoptic scale, about 100 miles or less; this is the size scale of more localized weather
features (such as thunderstorms or mountain-induced weather processes).

Microphysics: Used in reference to composition and particle types in a cloud.

Mid-level: the layer of the atmosphere from 10,000-20,000 feet.

Millibar (mb): a unit of pressure equal to 100 newtons per square meter (N/m2).

MSL (Mean Sea Level): Elevation height reference in comparison to sea level.


                                                         39
Negative (ly) tilted trough: A low-pressure trough where a portion is undercut, such that a frontal zone
can be in a northwest to southeast orientation.

Nucleation: The process of supercooled water droplets in a cloud turning to ice. This is the process that is
aided by cloud seeding. For purposes of cloud seeding, there are three possible types of cloud
composition: Liquid (temperature above the freezing point), supercooled (below freezing but still in liquid
form), and ice crystals.

Nuclei: Small particles that aid water droplet or ice particle formation in a cloud.
Orographic: Terrain-induced weather processes, such as cloud or precipitation development on the
upwind side of a mountain range. Orographic lift refers to the lifting of an air mass as it encounters a
mountain range.

Precipitable Water, or PWAT: The total atmospheric water vapor contained in a vertical column of unit
cross-sectional area extending between the surface and top of the atmosphere, expressed in terms of the
depth to which that water substance would be if completely condensed and collected in a vessel of the
same unit cross-section.

Pressure Heights (e.g., 700 millibars, or mb): Corresponds to approximately 10,000 feet above sea level
(MSL); 850 mb corresponds to about 5,000 feet MSL; and 500 mb corresponds to about 18,000 feet MSL.
These are standard height levels that are occasionally referenced, with the 700 mb level most important
regarding cloud-seeding potential in most of the western U.S.

Positive (ly) tilted trough: A normal U-shaped trough configuration, where an incoming cold front would
generally be in a northeast– southwest orientation.

Reflectivity: The density of returned signal from a radar beam, which is typically bounced back due to
interaction with precipitation particles (either frozen or liquid) in the atmosphere. The reflectivity depends
on the size, number, and type of particles that the radar beam encounters.

Ridge (or High Pressure System): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable
weather. Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic
(clockwise) circulation pattern.

Ridge axis: The longitude band corresponding to the high point of a ridge.

Rime (or rime ice): Ice buildup on an object (often on an existing precipitation particle) due to the freezing
of supercooled water droplets.

Shortwave (or shortwave disturbance): Smaller-scale wave features of the weather pattern typically seen
at mid-latitudes, usually on the order of a few to several hundred miles; these often correspond to
individual frontal systems.




                                                         40
Silver iodide: A compound commonly used in cloud seeding because of the similarity of its molecular
structure to that of an ice crystal. This structure helps in the process of nucleation, where supercooled
cloud water changes to ice crystal form.

Sounding: A measurement of the vertical distribution of physical properties of the atmospheric column
such as temperature, dewpoint, pressure, wind speed and direction. Soundings are typically conducted
by releasing a balloon filled with hydrogen or helium with instrumentation attached that measures
different properties as the balloon rises from the surface until it pops at very high altitudes (80-100 kft).

Stable layer: A layer of given thickness in the atmosphere where temperatures are constant with height
or rise with height; this results in little to no vertical movement of the air and little to no
turbulence/mixing.

Storm Track (sometimes referenced as the Jet Stream): A zone of maximum storm propagation and
development, usually concentrated in the mid-latitudes.

Stratiform: Usually used in reference to precipitation, this implies a large area of precipitation that has a
fairly uniform intensity except where influenced by terrain, etc. It is the result of larger-scale (synoptic
scale) weather processes, as opposed to convective processes.

Sublimation: The phase change in which water in solid form (ice) turns directly into water vapor. The
opposite process is deposition.

Subsidence: The process of a given air mass moving downward in elevation, such as often occurs on the
downwind side of a mountain range.

Subtropical/subtropics: Referring to the region of the Earth bordering on the tropics, from the Tropic of
Cancer/Capricorn (23.5°N/S) to about 35°N/S. Subtropical moisture would refer to moisture whose
source region is the subtropics. Subtropical Jet Stream would refer to a jet stream within the subtropics.

Supercooled: Liquid water (such as tiny cloud droplets) occurring at temperatures below the freezing
point (32°F or 0°C).

Synoptic Scale: A scale of hundreds to perhaps 1,000+ miles, the size scale at which high and low pressure
systems develop.

Trough (or low pressure system): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy weather.
Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic
(counterclockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere.

Trough axis: The longitude band corresponding to the low point of a trough.

Unstable air mass: an air mass wherein a perturbation (wave) increases in magnitude over time. A parcel
of air displaced upward in an unstable airmass will continue to rise until it reaches equilibrium. Regions


                                                         41
where, if moisture is sufficient, convection can develop if a mechanism (e.g., heating, frontal boundary) is
present to initiate lift.

Upper level: The region of the atmosphere above 20 kft and below the tropopause (approx. 60-80 kft).

Upper-Level Jet or Jet Stream (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-latitude
synoptic-scale storm development.

Upper level low/trough/disturbance: an area of low pressure located at higher altitudes, e.g., at 700 mb
/ 10,000 feet MSL or 500 mb / 18,000 feet MSL.

UTC (or GMT, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7
hours.

Vector: Term used to represent wind velocity (speed + direction) at a given point.

Velocity: Describes speed of an object, often used in the description of wind intensities.

Vertical Wind Profiler: Ground-based system that measures wind velocity at various levels above the
radar site.

Wave clouds: Clouds that form on the rising branches of mountain waves created within a stable airmass
in strong flow downwind of mountains. On satellite imagery, they appear as spaced bands of clouds
parallel to and downwind of the mountain barrier.




                                                         42
