Rainmaker Technology Corporation


      Annual Cloud Seeding Report

       Cache Valley UAV Program

           2024-2025 Season




              June 2025




                                    1
Table of Contents

1.     Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 3
2.     Project Design ............................................................................................................................................... 4
3.     Operations .................................................................................................................................................. 15
4.     Rainmaker Research and Development ....................................................................................................... 22
5.     Conclusions ................................................................................................................................................. 27
Glossary............................................................................................................................................................... 28




                                                                                                                                                                        2
1.       Executive Summary
Season one of the Cache Valley UAV cloud seeding program ran from January 27, 2025 through April 30,
2025, marking the inaugural deployment of Rainmaker’s first ever drone based cloud seeding platform in
the State of Utah. The program was a joint operation effort between Utah State University, recently acquired
North American Weather Consultants, and Rainmaker.
Rainmaker successfully delivered and certified ten “Elijah” UAVs for cloud seeding operations in Cache
Valley. Four Forward-Deployed Engineers (FDEs) were based in Salt Lake City and deployed to one of two
predetermined locations within Utah State University’s Certificate of Authorization (COA) area when the
project meteorologist deemed conditions favorable for seeding. The COA, located in Northern Utah’s Cache
Valley region, imposed strict operational guidelines. UAV operations required the presence of a Utah State
University-designated Pilot in Command (PIC). Additionally, UAVs were permitted to ascend to within 500
feet of the cloud base, provided cloud bases were between 1,500 and 3,000 feet above ground level. If cloud
bases were below 1,500 feet and visibility exceeded 3 miles, UAVs could be flown up to—but not into—the
cloud base.
During the 2024–2025 operational period, fourteen cloud seeding flight missions were conducted at varying
altitudes, totaling over 80 hours of flight time and resulting in the dispersion of 8,637 grams of silver iodide
(AgI).
Concurrently, Rainmaker has significantly advanced the development of its UAVs, meteorological
instrumentation, and forecasting and validation software. These advances will bear fruit in Utah, namely by
significantly improving and upgrading outdated validation techniques and by enabling Rainmaker to expand
UAV seeding opportunities temporally and geographically across the state.
Following a successful inaugural season, Rainmaker’s FDEs will return to Utah in November to initiate
Season Two with the following objectives completed:
     1. Acquire appropriate Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) waivers to be able to fly in-cloud at
        altitudes greater than 3000 feet above ground level
     2. Upgrade meteorological instrumentation infrastructure to increase forecasting accuracy and
        update validation techniques
     3. Expand UAV cloud seeding operations to other regions of the State




                                                                                                              3
2.      Project Design
2.1.    Background
Rainmaker in collaboration with Utah State University and recently acquired North American Weather
Consultants (NAWC) conducted its first ever drone based cloud seeding platform in the State of Utah from
January 27, 2025 through April 30, 2025. Waivers with the FAA to fly in Utah State University’s COA were
finalized on January 27, 2025 and the projects first seeding mission was flown on February 1, 2025.


2.2.    Operational Description
It is necessary that the silver iodide crystals become active upwind of the crest of a mountain barrier (i.e.,
the crest within the target area or defining its downwind boundary) so that the available supercooled
liquid water (SLW) in the precipitation formation zone can be effectively converted to ice crystals, with
enough time for the crystals to grow to snowflake size and precipitate within the intended target area. If
the AgI crystals take too long to become active, or if the temperature upwind of the crest is too warm,
the silver iodide crystals will pass from the generator through the precipitation formation zone and over
the mountain crest without freezing additional water cloud droplets. Thus, an important task for the
project meteorologists is to identify the seedable portions of the cloud systems which traverse the project
area.
Rainmaker operated the UAV cloud seeding program in Cache Valley using selective seeding methodology,
similarly to how NAWC has been operating ground-based cloud seeding programs in Utah for over forty
years. Selective seeding means that seeding is conducted only during specific time periods and in specific
locations where it is likely to be most effective. This decision is based on several criteria which determine
the seedability of the storm. These criteria deal with characteristics of the atmosphere including
temperature, stability, and wind flow, both in and below the clouds. The moisture content of the
atmosphere, including cloud types and occurrence of supercooled liquid water (SLW) are important
factors during seeding operations. Some heavier storm periods may not be seeded due to factors which
make the storm naturally efficient at producing precipitation and bring low visibility. Other storm periods
can be deemed unfavorable due to several factors including temperature, stability or wind direction.
Additionally, Rainmaker adhered to the strict operational guidelines imposed by Utah State University’s
COA waiver. The general criteria of selective seeding and the COA wavier are provided below.


            •   Supercooled clouds are present, and relative humidity is greater than 70%
            •   Low level wind speed and direction favor the transport of silver iodide seeding material,
                from its release location into the target area.




                                                                                                            4
           •   Fly above any low-level inversions or stable layers so that vertical and horizontal
               transport of silver iodide can reach into the cloud deck.
           •   Temperatures at the 700-mb level (~10,000 ft) are colder than -5°C.
           •   Can only fly within Utah State University’s COA area
           •   UAV must stay within visual line of sight and visibility must be greater than 3SM.
           •   UAVs were permitted to ascend to within 500 feet of the cloud base, provided cloud
               bases were between 1,500 and 3,000 feet above ground level.
           •   If cloud bases were below 1,500 feet, UAVs could be flown up to—but not into—the cloud
               base.

2.3.   Suspension Criteria
As required in the cloud seeding permit granted by the Utah Department of Water Resources, seeding
operations shall not be undertaken, or shall be suspended, if:
   •   There is an emergency that affects public welfare in the region.
   •   The National Weather Service (NWS) forecasts a storm to produce unusually heavy precipitation
       that could contribute to avalanches or unusually severe weather conditions in the project area.
   •   The Utah Avalanche Center issues an Extreme avalanche forecast warning for avalanche areas
       located in the target area (note, see modifications to this suspension criterion below).
   •   The National Weather Service forecasts a warm winter storm (freezing level above 8000 feet) with
       the possibility of considerable rain at the higher elevations that might lead to local flooding.
           •   When potential flood conditions exist in or around any of the project areas the Permit
               Holder shall consult with the NWS Flood Forecast services. Seeding would be suspended
               if the NWS determines any of the following warnings or forecasts are in effect:
           •   Flash flood warnings by the NWS
           •   Forecasts of excessive runoff issued by a river basin forecast center.
           •   Quantitative precipitation forecasts issued by the NWS, which would produce excessive
               runoff.
In addition, seeding is to be suspended at any time the snowpack water equivalents at selected target
SNOTEL sites exceed: 175% of average on Jan. 1st, 165% of average on Feb. 1st, 155% of average on Mar.
1st and 145% of average on Apr. 1st when two or more SNOTEL sites located in the target area exceed
these amounts. A provision is made where seeding can continue in a portion of the target area that is
below the suspension criteria, using generators not expected to impact the SNOTEL sites that exceed the
suspension criteria. There are also avalanche suspension criteria developed based on discussions with
the Utah Department of Water Resources which focus on avalanche conditions for highways and
populated areas.



                                                                                                     5
No seeding suspension occurred during January 27 – April 30 2025.


2.4.    Equipment and Project Set-up
In December 2024 Rainmaker successfully delivered and certified ten “Elijah” UAVs for the cloud seeding
program in Cache Valley. Four Rainmaker Forward-Deployed Engineers (FDEs) were trained and stationed
in Salt Lake City and would deployed to one of two predetermined flying locations within Utah State
University’s Certificate of Authorization (COA) area when the project meteorologist deemed conditions
favorable for seeding. Most winter storms that affect the northern Utah mountains are associated with
synoptic weather systems which move into Utah from the southwest, west, or northwest. They often
consist of a frontal system and/or an upper trough, with south or southwesterly winds ahead of these
features. In meteorology, wind directions are reported as the direction the wind is blowing from, in
advance of the system. As the front and/or trough moves through the area, the wind flow typically
becomes more northwesterly as time passes. Clouds and precipitation may precede, as well as follow,
the front/trough passage, and thus the flying locations were carefully selected to enable seeding
operations in southwesterly, westerly, or northwesterly flow situations. The COA area along with the two
predetermined flying locations are shown in Figure 2.1. Pertinent flying location information is listed in
Table 2-1.




                                                                                                        6
Figure 2.1        Utah State University COA area with yellow pins representing flying locations. The purple pin
                  represents the location of a Radiometrics radiometer and purple pins


                                                 Table 2-1
                                     UAV Cloud Seeding Flying Loctions
             Site Name                 Elev (Ft)                Lat (N)                      Long (W)
              Netwon                       4804                    41.87285                 -111.96998
               Avon                        5017                    41.52702                 -111.80290


Figure 2.2 shows one of the Rainmaker “Elijah” unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) utilized in the Cache
Valley UAV seeding program. Each UAV is equipped with a suite of meteorological and operational
sensors, including temperature, pressure, and relative humidity sensors, along with an aerosol dispersion
system (ADS) and anti-collision lighting. The active seeding agent—pure silver iodide (AgI) crystals—is
loaded within the ADS and released once the UAV reaches the target altitude. These silver iodide particles
function as ice-nucleating agents, with peak effectiveness observed in cloud temperatures between -5 °C




                                                                                                             7
and -10 °C. Each UAV is capable of carrying and dispersing up to 50 grams of silver iodide per flight, with
typical mission durations ranging from approximately 25 to 30 minutes.




Figure 2.2      Rainmaker Elijah UAV



2.5.    Operations Center and Personnel
Rainmaker maintains fully equipped operations centers at its headquarters in El Segundo, California and
at its newly acquired subsidiary North American Weather Consultants office based in North Salt Lake City,
Utah. Real-time weather information is acquired online, supporting decisions regarding where and when
to seed. Information used to determine seeding potential includes hourly weather reports, rawinsonde
observations, surface and upper-air charts, weather cameras, weather radar, satellite images and
computer model forecasts. The project meteorologist in charge of the operations utilizes this information
to make informed cloud seeding decisions, as well as for documenting weather information and seeding
activities for future reference.

Figures 2.3-2.6 show examples of some of the available weather information that was used in this
decision-making process during the operational period that ran from January 27 – April 30, 2025. These
include global and regional forecast model data, weather radar images, satellite images, and surface wind
and temperature maps.
Figure 2.7 illustrates the predictions of seeding plume dispersion using the HYSPLIT (Hybrid Single-Particle
Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory) model that was developed in-house by Rainmaker. This model provides
forecasts of the horizontal and vertical spread of a seeding plume in real-time, based on wind fields
contained in the weather forecast models.




                                                                                                          8
Figure 2.8 shows an example of a cross-section plot during a seeded event from this past winter season
using the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations 3-km HRRR (High Resolution and Rapid
Refresh Model). The user can specify a cross section over any location in the continental U.S. or Canada.
This model data was used during cloud seeding operations as a guidance. In these cross sections, liquid
water is plotted as a function of distance and height, with temperatures (red dashed lines), wind directions
and speed (wind barbs) and potential temperatures (solid black lines) also being displayed.
During the summer of 2024, Utah’s Division of Water Resources purchased a Radiometer from
Radiometrics. A radiometer is a passive instrument that continuously provides air temperature, humidity
and liquid profile products from the surface to 10km above the ground. Figure 2.9 shows a picture of the
Radiometer that was deployed in Logan in the fall of 2024 and Figure 2.10 shows an example of the
products output by the radiometer during a storm event. The radiometer will continue to be utilized in
future winter seasons and possibly lead to further verification techniques.




Figure 2.3      Captured KMTX radar imagery of northern Utah on March 15, 2025 at 1225 MDT. Red x denotes
                flying location




                                                                                                          9
Figure 2.4   Satellite imagery of northern Utah on March 15, 2025 at 1200 MDT




Figure 2.5   Mesowest surface data map on March 15, 2025. Surface observations are important for
             diagnosing low-level wind patterns and mixing.




                                                                                             10
Figure 2.6   GFS (Global Forecast Systems) forecast data plot for a storm event on March 15, 2025




Figure 2.7   Example of the Rainmaker HYSPLIT tool showing horizontal and vertical plume dispersion of
             seeding material. Taken during a seeded event on February 14, 2025 at 2000 MST




                                                                                                    11
Figure 2.8   HRRR modeled Cross Section of Liquid Water in Cache Valley on February 7, 2024 – Valid at 1100
             MST




                                                                                                        12
Figure 2.9   Picture of the Radiometer that was deployed in Logan in the Fall of 2024




                                                                                        13
Figure 2.10   Example of Radiometer data output from January 17, 2025 showing temperature, RH, Liquid
              Water and Water Vapor




                                                                                                  14
3.       Operations
Season one of the Cache Valley UAV cloud seeding program ran from January 27, 2025 through April 30,
2025, marking the inaugural deployment of Rainmaker’s first ever drone based cloud seeding platform in
the State of Utah. During the 2024–2025 operational period, fourteen cloud seeding flight missions were
conducted at varying altitudes, totaling over 80 hours of flight time and resulting in the dispersion of 8,637
grams of silver iodide (AgI). Table 3-1 shows the dates, flight elevations, total flight times, and total amount
of Agl that was dispersed during each storm event.


                                               Table 3-1
                             Cache Valley UAV Seeding Operations Summary
     Storm Number             Date             Flight Elevations (ft)      Total Flight Hrs     Total Agl (g)

           1               February 1                1998 agl                     3.5                350

           2               February 5             1900-2900 agl                   2.5                250

           3               February 7             2296-2460 agl                   3.5                400

           4              February 11                 984 agl                      4                 400

           5             February 13-15            656-2980 agl                   20                1960

           6             February 16-17              1968 agl                    7.75                900

           7              February 20                 656 agl                     .75                150

           8                March 3              820 – 2620 AGL                    4                 550

           9                March 6               410 – 656 AGL                    4                 200

          10                March 15             328 – 1640 AGL                   10                1275

          11                March 18              656 – 984 AGL                  6.75                782

          12                March 22             656 – 1640 AGL                   5.5                602

          13                March 29             1312 – 1968 AGL                  2.5                258

          14           March 31 – April 1            1640 AGL                    5.25                560

     Season to Date            ---                       —                        80                8637




                                                                                                             15
3.1.    Operational Procedures
During the operational period, the project meteorologist monitored each approaching storm with the aid of
continually updated online weather information. If the storm parameters met the seedability criteria
presented in Section 2 and if no seeding curtailments or suspensions were in effect, the Forward Deployed
Engineers would deploy to one of the seeding locations and begin seeding using the UAVs. Seeding
continued as long as conditions were favorable and supercooled clouds remained over the region.
3.2.    Operational Summary
A synopsis of the atmospheric conditions during operational seeding periods is provided below. All times
reported are local, either in MST or MDT. This synopsis describes seeded storm periods, as well as some
significant storm periods that were not seeded.

February 2025
The program officially became active on January 27, 2025 but the first seedable storm did not impact
northern Utah until February 1, 2025. February was a fairly wet month across northern Utah, with a couple
major storm periods (February 13-15 and February 16-17) bringing substantial snowfall to the area
watersheds. In total, there were seven seeded storm periods during the month, all of which are
summarized below.
February 1, 2025
Westerly flow extended from northern California through the Great Basin and across the central Rockies
during the early morning hours, as a landing falling atmospheric river penetrated inland beyond the Sierra
Crest and into northern Utah. Ample moisture led to the development of heavy orographic precipitation,
which persisted throughout the morning, the afternoon and into the evening hours as well. 700mb level
temperatures were around -8 degrees C in the morning, but as the mild subtropical airmass associated
with the atmospheric river spread across the state throughout the day, 700mb temperatures warmed to
near -5 degrees C by 1800 MST and eventually up to near -3 degrees C late in the evening. Eight flight
operations were recorded from approximately 0945 MST through about 1530 MST at an elevation of
about 1998 feet agl. Seeding operations ended by 1600 MST after it was determined temperatures were
becoming too warm for the altitude at which the drone could fly at.
February 5, 2025
A mild airmass within an enhanced southerly flow aloft set up across northern Utah on the morning of
February 5, which was ahead of an approaching cold front. A narrow zone of warm advection ahead of
the front allowed a burst of convective showers to develop along the terrain east of I-15. As the front
grazed northern Utah later in the afternoon, cold advection developed and lowered 700mb temperatures
from near –2 degrees C to near –9 degrees C. Convergence along the boundary brought another burst of
heavy valley rain/snow and mountain snow to the terrain east of I-15. Showers continued across the
region until about 1800 MST after which lift and moisture behind the departing front quickly dissipated




                                                                                                       16
and showers dried out. Five flight operations were recorded from approximately 1200 MST through 1347
MST. Recorded flights varied in elevation between about 1900-2900 feet agl.
February 7, 2025
A somewhat compact trough embedded within the longwave pattern over the Pacific Northwest grazed
by northern Utah during the afternoon and evening hours. A quick moving cold front accompanying this
trough pushed through north/central Utah between about 1100-1400 MST. The frontal boundary
produced a band of heavy precipitation along its leading edge with a brief period of gusty northwesterly
winds. Temperatures dropped rapidly behind the front, falling from near –2 degrees C at 700mb to near
–14 degrees C. Winds gradually calmed through the late afternoon but deep instability in the post frontal
airmass continued to generate additional showers over the terrain until conditions finally dried out after
2100 MST. Ten flight operations were recorded from approximately 1409 MST through 1653 MST.
Recorded flights varied in elevation between about 2296-2460 feet agl.
February 11, 2025
The axis of an upper-level trough pivoted overhead northern Utah late in the morning and into the
afternoon with a cold frontal boundary following closely behind it. Light snow developed across the
terrain of northern Utah after about 1000 MST and continued through the early evening hours before
ending by 1800 MST. Moisture was very limited with this cold system given the airmass originated over
western Canada. 700mb temperatures hovered around –14/-15 degrees C through the morning but fell
to near –20/-21 degrees C later in evening. Even though it was a marginal system for seeding, nine flight
operations took place from approximately 0934MST through 1406MST. Flight altitude was recorded at
984 feet agl.
February 13-15, 2025
A major atmospheric river system made landfall across the western US and brought well above normal
moisture to the state of Utah February 13-15. Heavy precipitation broke out across the state on the
morning of the 13th and continued through afternoon and evening. Warm southerly flow aloft allowed
700mb temperatures to climb up to around -5 Degrees C through the day. Precipitation gradually
decreased on the morning of February 14th but did not come to a complete end as deep moisture
remained and several weak waves rippled across the state. A cold front then crossed Utah from north to
south on the evening of February 14th, bringing another increase in precipitation along with much cooler
temperatures. 700mb temperatures fell to near -11C on the evening of the 14th with snow showers
persisting across the terrain of northern Utah. Showers finally came to an end on the morning of February
15th as drier air worked its way in from the northwest and high pressure built across Utah. Approximately
51 flight operations were recorded with the first taking place around 1853 on the 13th and the last around
0545 MST on the 15th. Flight elevations varied widely throughout the event, being as low as 656 feet agl
and as high as 2560 feet agl.
February 16-17, 2025




                                                                                                       17
A shortwave trough ejected eastward into northern Utah through the morning hours, along with some
moisture in a warm advection southwesterly flow pattern. Clouds filled in across Northern Utah and a
swath of precipitation spread over the Wasatch Front late in the morning through the afternoon. Warm
advection allowed this first system quickly exited the region late in the evening and a brief relative lull in
showers developed overnight into the morning of February 17. A secondary system or piece of energy
then made its way across northern Utah through the early morning hours of the 17th. This second system
brought a push of colder temperatures aloft along with increased instability and steepening lapse rates.
700mb temperatures lowered to near -9 degrees C and widespread convective showers developed across
the region which continued through about midday before ending. Twelve flight operations occurred on
February 16th from approximately 1758 MST through 2330 MST. Flight elevations on the 16th were around
1968 feet agl. Ten additional flights occurred on the 17th, from 1515 MST through 2030 MST. Elevations
were generally around 1968 feet agl.
February 20, 2025
An upper-level trough located over western Utah on the morning of February 20th was quickly making its
way across the state. Within this trough, a closed upper-level circulation developed over northern Utah
and was producing a band of heavy precipitation across the Wasatch Front. This area of heavy
precipitation continued through the morning hours before tapering off after about 1500 MST. Three flight
operations were attempted in the morning between about 0730-0816 MST but poor visibility from
ongoing heavy precipitation grounded operations. Flight operations were later cancelled for the
remainder of the storm as visibility was forecast to remain poor throughout the afternoon. Flight
elevations were around 656 feet agl.


March 2025
March was an active weather month with seven seeded storm periods, summarized below. Although
some of these events were very minor and/or brief in duration, there were also a few larger seeded events
and other precipitation periods not favorable to seeding due to various meteorological parameters.
March 3, 2025
Upper air and satellite analysis on the afternoon of March 3rd revealed a large upper-level low shifting
eastward across the central Rockies with lee cyclogenesis developing across eastern Colorado. Further
upstream, the back edge of the aforementioned trough was crossing through Utah. Strong cold advection
on the back side of this system combined with deep layer moisture and steepening lapse rates to fuel the
development of convective orographic snow showers. 700mb temperatures were around –9 to –10 degrees
Celsius and the winds were westerly to northwesterly in direction gusting 10-20 kts. Seeding operations
commenced around 1700 MST and continued until showers started tapering off around 0000 MST on March
4. Twelve flight operations were recorded with flight elevations ranging between about 820-2620 feet AGL.
March 6, 2025



                                                                                                           18
An active pattern continued throughout the day and into the night as a complex upper-level trough crossed
the Great Basin region. Early morning upper-air and satellite analysis indicated a strong upper-level low
centered near the San Francisco Bay area. An associated jet max was rounding the base of the trough,
spreading broad upper-level diffluence across portions of the Desert Southwest. An embedded shortwave
ejected ahead of the parent low, combined with deep moisture, leading to widespread and heavy
precipitation across Utah. This first shortwave ejected northward later in the morning and afternoon, with
moderate to heavy precipitation gradually turning more showery by late afternoon. Through the morning
hours, the flow remained southerly and 700mb temperatures held around –3 to -5°C. As the main trough
dug southward into southern California and Arizona later that evening into the early morning hours of March
7th, cold advection increased and drove 700mb temperatures down to near –11°C. The cooling aloft
increased instability by steepening lapse rates, which produced some weak CAPE. This brought the
potential for a few weak thunderstorms that afternoon and evening, before precipitation tapered further and
became more orographic lift-dominant overnight into the early morning hours of March 7th. Seeding
operations began around 1700 MST but drones were later ground for the night after 2300 MST due to
visibility dropping below a mile. A total of ten flights were recorded with flight elevations ranging between
about 410-656 feet AGL.
March 15, 2025
A diffuse upper-level diffluent flow pattern was in place across the Intermountain West region early on the
morning of March 15, with Utah generally being under a cold but moisture-rich northwesterly mid-level flow
pattern. Light snow had developed across northern Utah around 0200/0300 MDT as a weak shortwave
trough embedded in the flow traversed the northern half of the state. Snow showers continued through
much of the day as the cold and moist northwesterly flow pattern persisted. Instability increased
significantly later in the morning into the early afternoon hours as the strong mid-March sun heated the
surface. CAPE values increased to near 200–400 J/kg, with lapse rates steepening to near 9.5°C/km.
Scattered snow squalls popped up with stronger cells generating graupel and a couple rumbles of thunder.
Cloud bases were generally around 1200–1900 feet AGL through the early morning hours but rose to near
2500–3000 feet AGL. Showers quickly diminished with the loss of daytime heating after about 1800–1900
MDT, and a building ridge upstream induced subsidence across Utah. Flying operations started around 0300
MDT and concluded around 1500 MDT. A total of 30 flights were recorded with flight elevations ranging
between about 328 – 1640 feet AGL.
March 18, 2025
An upper-level trough with its axis located over southeast Idaho through southern Nevada crossed Utah
through the day. The associated cold front had already made its way through all but far southeast Utah as
of 0600 MDT, with moderate to heavy snow ongoing early that morning. Snow showers decreased in
intensity through the morning hours and became more confined to the terrain as a cold and moist
northwesterly flow pattern provided favorable ingredients for orographic lift. As the cold core of the trough
moved over Utah that afternoon, it combined with daytime heating instability and brought more widespread




                                                                                                          19
convective showers. Mesoscale analysis in the afternoon showed CAPE values reaching upwards of 200–
300 J/kg with 700mb temperatures hovering around –11/–12°C. Showers quickly tapered off after about
2100 MDT that evening as daytime heating was lost and a ridge building in upstream induced subsidence
across the region. Seeding operations began around 0800 MDT and lasted until the flight crew ran out of
silver iodide after 1600 MDT. A total of 17 flights were recorded with flight elevations ranging between about
656 – 984 feet AGL.
March 22, 2025
Quasi-zonal flow extended from the eastern Pacific inland across northern Utah early on the morning of
March 22. An embedded shortwave trough was noted rotating through the northern Great Basin along the
nose of a 110 knot jet streak. Broken bands of precipitation had continued overnight into early that morning
within this region of forcing and persisted through at least mid-morning, becoming increasingly
orographically forced with time as the upper flow veered and the primary forcing moved away from the area.
700mb temperatures lowered to near –8°C that morning and afternoon as slightly cooler temperatures
worked in behind the shortwave trough. Cooling temperatures aloft and increased solar heating in the
afternoon produced a few weak convective snow squalls. As the trough began to move east later that
afternoon, drier air began to spread into northern Utah, with most orographically forced showers quickly
tapering off and ending by 1700 MDT. The large-scale pattern then amplified that evening as a broad upper-
level ridge built across the Great Basin. Seeding operations were conducted from 0500 MDT until 1230
MDT. Operations ended around midday due to wind gusts exceeding 30 mph at the drone launch site. A total
for 14 flights were recorded with flight elevations ranging between 656 – 1640 feet AGL.
March 29, 2025
Early morning upper air and satellite analysis on March 29th indicated general troughing across the Western
US, with several shortwave troughs rotating around a large upper-level low in the Gulf of Alaska. One of
these shortwaves pushed into the western Great Basin early in the morning and later crossed through Utah
in the early afternoon. The splitting trough sent a disorganized and weakening cold front across the state,
with scattered convective showers developing during the afternoon hours as a result of increased instability
from the front and daytime heating. 700mb temperatures lowered to near –6/-7°C late in the afternoon
behind the front, with winds generally being 5-15 kts and northwesterly in direction. Shower activity quickly
tapered off after sunset, and conditions fully dried out after 23/0000 MDT as a shortwave ridge built in
overnight into the following morning. A total of 6 flights were recorded from approximately 1200 MDT until
1600 MDT with flight elevations being around 1312 - 1968 feet AGL.
March 31 – April 1, 2025
A large and cold upper-level low was spinning off the coast of the Pacific Northwest early on the morning of
March 31. Downstream, broad diffluent flow was noted, with a strong 106-knot polar jet streak producing
scattered showers across northern Utah. As the upper low shifted onshore along the Pacific Northwest
Coast, southwest flow increased across Utah. By the afternoon of the 31st, southwest wind gusts of 40-50
kts were possible, with strong diabatic heating leading to the development of widespread showers and



                                                                                                           20
thunderstorms. An associated cold front then swung through northern Utah on the evening of 31 st, reaching
the Cache Valley region around 17/1800 MDT. The front was undergoing frontogenesis as it crossed the
region and was accompanied by a band of heavy rain changing to snow. Temperatures quickly dropped
behind the front, with 700mb temperatures lowering from near –3/-4°C to near –8/-9°C. Gusty southwest
winds shifted northwesterly and calmed through the night. Precipitation changed to all snow behind the
front, with widespread snow showers lingering in the post-frontal airmass overnight. Scattered snow
showers lingered across northern Utah through the morning and afternoon hours of April 1 st as a cold,
unstable and moist northwesterly flow pattern provided favorable ingredients for orographic lift. Showers
then finally tapered off and ended early in the evening of April 1 st. A total for 14 flights were recorded from
approximately 2100 MDT on March 31st until 0400 MDT on April 1 with flight elevations being around 1640
feet AGL. Operations ended on April 1st at 0400 MDT due to Utah State not having any additional Pilots In
Command (PIC’s) available for operations beyond that time.

April 2025
Most of April was dominated by dry weather and above normal temperatures with upper-level ridging
situated across the Great Basin region. There were several stormy periods that developed at the beginning
of the month, around mid-month and again during the last week of the month. However, none of these
storm events provided favorable parameters for seeding with the drone. Temperatures were either too
mild, moisture was insufficient, or winds were above the UAV’s threshold or blowing from an unfavorable
direction.




                                                                                                             21
4.      Rainmaker Research and Development
Rainmaker’s concurrent research and development (R&D) efforts since signing the Cache Valley UAV
contract have produced a fully integrated technology platform for cloud seeding, centered on three core
products— Elijah V2.0, Eden, and Prophet—that together enable precise prediction, targeting, and
validation of precipitation enhancement.
4.1.    Elijah V 2.0 – Autonomous Cloud Seeding UAV
Rainmaker’s Elijah V 2.0 is the world’s first purpose-built UAV for in-cloud sensing, targeting, and seeding
all on one platform.




Figure 4.1      Rainmaker Elijah V2.0 UAV




                                                                                                         22
                                                Table 5-1
                                Rainmaker Elijah V 2.0 Flight Specifications
              Specification                           Imperial                         Metric

          Max Wind Resistance                         50 knots                       92.6 km/h

            Max Altitude AGL                         16,500 ft                         5000 m

       Max Flight Time at 10,000 ft                 45 minutes                       45 minutes

         Max Flight Time in Icing                   45 minutes                       45 minutes

               Climb Rate                              49 ft/s                         15 m/s

            Max Radio Range                          12.5 miles                         20 km

                 Weight                               20.3 lbs                         9.2 kgs

              Max Payload                              6.6lbs                           3 kgs


4.2.     Elijah V 2.0 Instrumentation
    •    Dispersion rate of 3.5 g/min dispersion (210g/hour)
    •    Dispersion type: Modularity enables solid aerosols, liquid atomization, and flares
    •    Sensors: Pressure, temperature, relative humidity
    •    Detection: Wind magnitude, wind vector, and supercooled liquid water detected using
         algorithms

4.3.     UAV Weatherization
Rainmaker’s anti-icing system, combined with onboard thermal resistors, allows the Elijah V2.0 UAV to
remain operational in icing conditions for up to 45 minutes. This capability enables extended in-cloud
flight for targeting, dispersion, idling, and atmospheric sensing. With improved performance at higher
altitudes, Elijah V2.0 increases the frequency and expands the temporal and geographical windows for
cloud seeding operations. Figure 4.2 presents historical radiosonde data from Salt Lake City, showing the
percentage of seedable days by month, the average height of the freezing level, and the average wind
speed at that level. The data was filtered to reflect conditions favorable for seeding—specifically, where
relative humidity exceeded 90%, temperatures ranged from -20°C to 0°C, and cloud depth was less than
2000 meters. The analysis highlights how Elijah V2.0 can extend UAV seeding operations into the warmer
spring and fall months, when opportunities have traditionally been more limited.




                                                                                                       23
Figure 4.2      Salt Lake City Historical Radiosonde data (1990-2024)



4.4.    Eden - Remote Ground-Truth Sensing
Eden, shown in Figure 4.3, is a remote sensing platform that delivers hyperlocal cloud and environmental
intelligence by combining high-resolution microphysics profiling with ground-based monitoring. A K-band
cloud radar continuously captures in-cloud particle size distributions and seeding potential, while a co-
located LiDAR ceilometer tracks cloud-base height in real time. Complementing these measurements, an
array of surface sensors records temperature, wind speed and direction, barometric pressure, humidity,
and PM₂.₅ concentrations—data that feed directly into Peregrine’s dynamic mission- calibration
algorithms.




                                                                                                      24
Figure 4.3      Eden Ground-Truth Sensing



4.5.    Prophet - Command, Control, and Intelligence
Forecasting
Prophets forecasting engine fuses Elijah’s in-cloud measurements, Eden’s ground-truth data, satellite
imagery, and regional C-band radar into a unified numerical weather-prediction framework. By ingesting
real-time microphysical profiles and surface observations, it produces hyperlocal, minute- by-minute
maps of supercooled liquid-water content, cloud-top heights, and seeding potential— enabling mission
planners to identify optimal launch windows and target areas with unprecedented precision.
Nowcasting & Remote Control
Building on its forecasts, Prophet delivers continuous nowcasts via live telemetry from Elijah UAVs and
Eden ground stations. Automated dispatch algorithms adjust flight paths on the fly in response to changes
in wind shear, cloud-base elevation, and liquid-water availability. Operators can issue real- time
commands or rely on pre-authorized decision rules to reroute missions dynamically—maximizing seeding
efficiency while ensuring safety and compliance with local aviation constraints.
Validation & Attribution
After each operation, Prophet’s validation suite applies high-frequency radar-return analysis and
comparative quantitative precipitation estimation (QPE) over seeded versus control domains.
Sophisticated signal-processing algorithms isolate the anthropogenic precipitation signature, quantify




                                                                                                      25
enhancement metrics, and feed into automated dashboards that generate clear time-series graphs and
statistical summaries of net water gain. This end-to-end attribution pipeline delivers rigorous proof-of-
concept and underpins Rainmaker’s performance guarantees. An example of prophets validation suite is
shown in Figure 4.4.




Figure 4.4     Prophet SLW detection (Top); Prophet seeding plume visualization (bottom)




                                                                                                      26
5.      Conclusions
5.1.    Season One lessons learned
Foundation-Setting
Over the course of Season One, Rainmaker completed the critical groundwork for scalable UAV cloud
seeding operations in the state of Utah. All human infrastructures, from logistics coordination teams and
local aviation liaisons to maintenance crews—has been recruited and trained under Rainmaker oversight.
At the same time, every technical component, including UAVs, weather stations, and the flight dashboard,
has been calibrated, stress-tested in situ and now just awaits installation. Standardized processes for
mission planning, regulatory compliance, safety checks, and data management are now in place, meaning
that once meteorological conditions achieve operational thresholds, seeding missions can commence
with minimal lead time. This solid foundation not only accelerates response cadence in Season Two but
also de-risks each deployment by embedding lessons learned into repeatable procedures.
5.2.    Season Two Objectives
Expand UAV Seeding Programs Across Utah
During Season One, operations were limited by restrictions within Utah State University’s Certificate of
Authorization (COA) waiver. UAVs were prohibited from flying in cloud, restricted to visual line of sight
operations, and could only be launched under the supervision of a Utah State University Pilot in
Command. To overcome these limitations for Season Two, Rainmaker is actively pursuing its own FAA
approval for expanded operational waivers for the Logan area and also across the state of Utah. These
include authorization to fly beyond visual line of sight and operate at altitudes up to 15,000 feet above
ground level.
Quantitative Precipitation Estimates
Building on improved seeding coverage and radar instrumentation, Season Two aims to quantify the total
volume of artificially induced rainfall precisely. Our target is to verify at least 2 million cubic meters of net
precipitation enhancement over the campaign. To achieve this, Prophet’s QPE algorithms will fuse data
from the MRR-Pro radars, regional C-band networks, and in-situ rain gauges—calibrating volumetric
estimates against baseline control areas. Rigorous cross-validation with Eden’s ground sensors and post-
storm hydrological audits will ensure that all measurements meet independent verification standards.
This quantitative milestone will not only demonstrate Rainmaker’s effectiveness at scale but also underpin
performance-based contracting for future seasons.




                                                                                                              27
Glossary
Advection: Movement of an air mass. Cold advection describes a colder air mass moving into the area,
and warm advection is used to describe an incoming warmer air mass. Dry and moist advection can be
used similarly.

Air Mass: A term used to describe a region of the atmosphere with certain defining characteristics. For
example, a cold or warm air mass, or a wet or dry air mass. It is a fairly subjective term but is usually used
in reference to large (synoptic scale) regions of the atmosphere, both near the surface and/or at mid and
upper levels of the atmosphere.


Cold-core low: A typical mid-latitude type of low-pressure system, where the core of the system is colder
than its surroundings. This type of system is also defined by the cyclonic circulation being strongest in the
upper levels of the atmosphere. The opposite is a warm-core low, which typically occurs in the tropics.


Cold Pool: An air mass that is cold relative to its surroundings, and may be confined to a particular basin


Condensation: Phase change of water vapor into liquid form. This can occur on the surface of objects
(such as dew on the grass) or in mid-air (leading to the formation of clouds). Clouds are technically
composed of water in liquid form, not water vapor.


Confluent: Wind vectors coming closer together in a two-dimensional frame of reference (opposite of
diffluent). The term convergence is also used similarly.


Convective (or convection): Pertains to the development of precipitation areas due to the rising of
warmer, moist air through the surrounding air mass. The warmth and moisture contained in a given air
mass makes it lighter than colder, dryer air. Convection often leads to small-scale, locally heavy showers
or thundershowers. The opposite precipitation type is known as stratiform precipitation.


Convergence: Refers to the converging of wind vectors at a given level of the atmosphere. Low-level
convergence (along with upper-level divergence), for instance, is associated with lifting of the air mass
which usually leads to development of clouds and precipitation. Low-level divergence (and upper-level
convergence) is associated with atmospheric subsidence, which leads to drying and warming.


Deposition: A phase change where water vapor turns directly to solid form (ice). The opposite process is
called sublimation.



                                                                                                           28
Dew point: The temperature at which condensation occurs (or would occur) with a given amount of
moisture in the air.


Diffluent: Wind vectors spreading further apart in a two-dimensional frame of reference; opposite of
confluent


Entrain: Usually used in reference to the process of a given air mass being ingested into a storm system


Evaporation: Phase change of liquid water into water vapor. Water vapor is usually invisible to the eye.


El Nino: A reference to a particular phase of oceanic and atmospheric temperature and circulation
patterns in the tropical Pacific, where the prevailing easterly trade winds weaken or dissipate. Often has
an effect on mid-latitude patterns as well, such as increased precipitation in southern portions of the U.S.
and decreased precipitation further north. The opposite phase is called La Nina.


Front (or frontal zone): Reference to a temperature boundary with either incoming colder air (cold front)
or incoming warmer air (warm front); can sometimes be a reference to a stationary temperature
boundary line (stationary front) or a more complex type known as an occluded front (where the
temperature change across a boundary can vary in type at different elevations).


Glaciogenic: Ice-forming (aiding the process of nucleation); usually used in reference to cloud seeding
nuclei


GMT (or UTC, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7
hours.


Graupel: A precipitation type that can be described as “soft hail”, that develops due to riming (nucleation
around a central core). It is composed of opaque (white) ice, not clear hard ice such as that contained in
hailstones. It usually indicated the presence of convective clouds and can be associated with electrical
charge separation and occasionally lightning activity.




                                                                                                         29
High Pressure (or Ridge): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable
weather. Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic
(clockwise) circulation pattern.


Inversion: Refers to a layer of the atmosphere in which the temperature increase with elevation


Jet Stream or Upper-Level Jet (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-latitude
synoptic-scale storm development.


La Nina: The opposite phase of that known as El Nino in the tropical Pacific. During La Nina the easterly
tropical trade winds strengthen and can lead in turn to a strong mid-latitude storm track, which often
brings wetter weather to northern portions of the U.S.


Longwave (or longwave pattern): The longer wavelengths, typically on the order of 1,000 – 2,000+ miles
of the typical ridge/trough pattern around the northern (or southern) Hemisphere, typically most
pronounced in the mid-latitudes.


Low-Level Jet: A zone of maximum wind speed in the lower atmosphere. Can be caused by geographical
features or various weather patterns, and can influence storm behavior and dispersion of cloud seeding
materials


Low-pressure (or trough):           Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy
weather. Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic
(counter-clockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere.


Mesoscale: Sub - synoptic scale, about 100 miles or less; this is the size scale of more localized weather
features (such as thunderstorms or mountain-induced weather processes).


Microphysics: Used in reference to composition and particle types in a cloud


MSL (Mean Sea Level): Elevation height reference in comparison to sea level




                                                                                                          30
Negative (ly) tilted trough: A low-pressure trough where a portion is undercut, such that a frontal zone
can be in a northwest to southeast orientation.


Nucleation: The process of supercooled water droplets in a cloud turning to ice. This is the process that
is aided by cloud seeding. For purposes of cloud seeding, there are three possible types of cloud
composition: Liquid (temperature above the freezing point), supercooled (below freezing but still in liquid
form), and ice crystals.


Nuclei: Small particles that aid water droplet or ice particle formation in a cloud


Orographic: Terrain-induced weather processes, such as cloud or precipitation development on the
upwind side of a mountain range. Orographic lift refers to the lifting of an air mass as it encounters a
mountain range.


Pressure Heights:
(700 millibars, or mb): Corresponds to approximately 10,000 feet above sea level (MSL); 850 mb
corresponds to about 5,000 feet MSL; and 500 mb corresponds to about 18,000 feet MSL. These are
standard height levels that are occasionally referenced, with the 700-mb level most important regarding
cloud-seeding potential in most of the western U.S.


Positive (ly) tilted trough: A normal U-shaped trough configuration, where an incoming cold front would
generally be in a northeast– southwest orientation.


Reflectivity: The density of returned signal from a radar beam, which is typically bounced back due to
interaction with precipitation particles (either frozen or liquid) in the atmosphere. The reflectivity
depends on the size, number, and type of particles that the radar beam encounters


Ridge (or High-Pressure System): Region of the atmosphere usually accompanied by dry and stable
weather. Corresponds to a northward bulge of the jet stream on a weather map, and to an anti-cyclonic
(clockwise) circulation pattern.


Ridge axis: The longitude band corresponding to the high point of a ridge


Rime (or rime ice): Ice buildup on an object (often on an existing precipitation particle) due to the freezing
of supercooled water droplets.




                                                                                                           31
Shortwave (or shortwave pattern): Smaller-scale wave features of the weather pattern typically seen at
mid-latitudes, usually on the order of a few to several hundred miles; these often correspond to individual
frontal systems


Silver iodide: A compound commonly used in cloud seeding because of the similarity of its molecular
structure to that of an ice crystal. This structure helps in the process of nucleation, where supercooled
cloud water changes to ice crystal form.


Storm Track (sometimes reference as the Jet Stream): A zone of maximum storm propagation and
development, usually concentrated in the mid-latitudes.


Stratiform: Usually used in reference to precipitation, this implies a large area of precipitation that has a
fairly uniform intensity except where influenced by terrain, etc. It is the result of larger-scale (synoptic
scale) weather processes, as opposed to convective processes.


Sublimation: The phase change in which water in solid form (ice) turns directly into water vapor. The
opposite process is deposition.


Subsidence: The process of a given air mass moving downward in elevation, such as often occurs on the
downwind side of a mountain range


Supercooled: Liquid water (such as tiny cloud droplets) occurring at temperatures below the freezing
point (32 F or 0 C).


Synoptic Scale: A scale of hundreds to perhaps 1,000+ miles, the size scale at which high and low-pressure
systems develop


Trough (or low-pressure system): Region of the atmosphere usually associated with stormy
weather. Corresponds to a southward dip to the jet stream on a weather map as well as a cyclonic
(counter-clockwise) circulation pattern in the Northern Hemisphere.


Trough axis: The longitude band corresponding to the low point of a trough


Upper-Level Jet or Jet Stream (sometimes referred to more generally as the storm track): A region of
maximum wind speed, usually in the upper atmosphere that usually coincides with the main storm track



                                                                                                          32
in the mid-latitudes. This is the area that also typically corresponds to the greatest amount of mid-latitude
synoptic-scale storm development.


UTC (or GMT, or Z) time: Greenwich Mean Time, universal time zone corresponding to the time at
Greenwich, England. Pacific Standard Time (PST) = GMT – 8 hours; Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) = GMT – 7
hours.


Vector: Term used to represent wind velocity (speed + direction) at a given point


Velocity: Describes speed of an object, often used in the description of wind intensities


Vertical Wind Profiler: Ground-based system that measures wind velocity at various levels above the site




                                                                                                          33
